hello Malcolm hey Joe how're you doing
I'm doing very well you sound like you
good good that was a good time but it's
through headphones it's very interesting
because I've been listening to talking
to strangers uh-huh
I like that you narrate your books it's
very frustrating when someone who's a
great speaker does not narrate their
books so thanks for doing that no I
actually I kind of enjoy I used to hate
that process with my first one and then
I've grown to enjoy it because of you
when you say your book out loud you see
in a different way oh well I'm a giant
fan of your work man particularly
outliers I've really loved that book
yeah very illuminating and it sort of
peels away the the mystery of talent hmm
and so tell me what you're doing what is
this talking to strangers I'm into about
I'm in the second chapter right now oh I
see well that was that was a book about
I was struck by how many of the kind of
high-profile cases that we got obsessed
with were at their root about the same
thing which is that individuals were two
people who didn't know each other well
had an exchange and they got each other
wrong so you know everything from Amanda
Knox to Bernie Madoff to the - Larry
Nasser at Michigan State to Jerry
Sandusky at Penn State and then to the
signature case which the book is
organized around which is the Sandra
bland case remember the young woman
Texas it gets pulled over by the
southern road yeah they're all at Roode
fundamentally the same problem which is
there's a there's an exchange between
and the exchange just goes wrong and the
question is why that's what I began to
get really fascinated by is you think at
this point in even of a human evolution
we have got this thing about talking to
strangers down mmm and we clearly don't
and we're being pushed to talk more more
to strangers right in a kind of
globalised world and if we're bad at it
that doesn't bode well does it well I
think there's also an issue today with
people not learning the necessary skills
and how to talk to people because so
much communication is done digitally
yeah that's it seems to be a giant issue
with young kids there they're more
awkward initially talking to people than
I think I remember yeah yeah no I think
that's probably you forget how much I
mean adolescent adolescents used to be
this one
one long rehearsal and how to be a
normal human being right conversation
and now the rehearsal it's like they
were also got cut in half and you know
instead of getting to the point where we
play basketball with basketballs we're
still just doing wind sprints there's
not you know right no it's actually
playing game you know playing the game
butchering the metaphor I know what
you're saying nothing the Sandra bland
case how does that one fit him because
that one that that girl was pulled over
the the cop was she it was failure to
signal right yeah I'm it's a bullshit
thing it's a bullshit thing yeah and she
started lighting a cigarette she told it
told her to put the cigarette out and it
all escalated from that she said she
doesn't have to put the cigarette out
and then he says he's gonna light her up
he's screaming at her he pulls her out
of the car he rests her and then is
there controversy about whether or not
she committed suicide in jail there is I
don't get into that okay because it
seemed that seemed unlikely that she was
killed that yes it seemed likely that
she was killed
versus she committed suicide I didn't
think that someone would commit suicide
being in jail for three days especially
one of the things you highlighted in the
book and you actually played in the
audio version of it her little sort of
affirmations you know and she was she
sounded very positive and upbeat and
calling everybody kings and queens and
it was everything thanking God and being
very thankful and being aware of of life
and
humility and just graciousness and
gratitude
it didn't seem I mean obviously you
don't know what kind of dark things can
happen to a person when they're
incarcerated for three days for a
bullshit reason how maybe that's the
straw that broke the camel's back but
she did have you know she had a
complicated emotional history she had
previously I tried to commit suicide oh
and she had she was emerging from a
quite a difficult period in her life and
went to Texas to start a new leaf and so
there is an interpretation like I said I
only have strong feelings on this
particular part of the story but there's
an interpretation that says here's a
woman who was emerged from very
difficult period in her life goes leaves
she was she was in Illinois she drives
hop across the country to start over and
on the first day that she arrives in
Texas to start over she gets pulled over
by a cop and by the way she had
thousands of dollars in outstanding
tickets so she had a history of this
bullshit stuff with cops where you know
the the same trap that many poor people
in this country get into which is they
get the police use people has an ATM
right they like set them up for done
trivial things and when they can't find
when they can't pay the fine they get
another fine and when you know you how
that goes she was part of in that trap
so here she is trying to start over
after a difficult time gets first day
she gets to Texas she gets pulled over
again and she in her mind it's the same
she's like oh my god I tried to start
over and I can't no and then she's in
jail and she can't make bail and you
know there's a scenario where you
couldn't see that she just began to
despair don't they take away your
shoelaces and into Old Town Texas yeah
are they doing things by the book
I mean I find the whole thing about I
went to that town when I was reporting
the book and you know the it's kind of
hard to be to kill
kill someone and get away from get away
with it requires a level of expertise
and forethought that struck me was not
present in that little town in Texas I
mean a serious heart it's just not I
don't they're not like they're not
thinking this is these are not people
playing chess right I think they they
just encountered it with this cop and
he's not very good at his job and he
gets way over his head
and he completely miss reads her and he
pulls her off to jail public deeply
regrets the whole incident and they're
all embarrassed and sitting around and
hoping it'll just all go away and
meanwhile she's all alone in a prison
cells spiraling deeper and deeper into
depression I mean it's I think it's
almost more tragic that she committed
suicide it's insane that you can keep
someone in jail for three days for
failure to signal it seems like there
should have been an initial review of
the circumstances that led to her
getting pulled out of the car in the
first place and the cop should have been
fired immediately you're screaming at
her because she lit a cigarette yeah in
your own car me well this is fascinating
and I feel like I don't know you you and
I are probably the same age there's this
to the cops 29 if you grew up with
cigarettes you have a different
understanding of the meaning of lighting
a cigarette so what's happening in the
encounter is he pulls her over what he
does is he sees her coming out of this
University campus and while she's still
on campus property she rolls through a
stop sign and then he notices that she's
cut out of state plates and she's a
young black woman and she's driving a
Hyundai like Donna not a Mercedes Benz
and he thinks huh I'm gonna check this
out
so he she pulls onto the road and he
drives up behind her aggressively he
speeds up behind her so what does she do
well what any of us would do she gets
out of the way thinking oh he's a he's
going to he's going to you know the
scene of an accident or something I
better get on his way she pulls over to
get out of his way and he goes oh you
didn't use your turning signal and he
pulls in pulls her over and pulls it
behind her no by the way whenever I hear
a
fire department truck or a police car
coming and I pull over to get out of the
way I do not use my turning signal right
you just get out of the way it's
relaxing right so her immediate thought
is what he does this is like oh this is
bullshit and he tricked me and he knows
what he's doing that's exactly what he
wanted he wanted to get her in a
situation because it's all a pretext he
just wants he thinks oh maybe there's
something weird with her so then he we
have this all on tape of course because
this is this is one of the sins that was
captured entirely on the dashcam the
officers dashcam he goes up to the
window and he says he looks at her and
he realizes she's agitated why because
Alvin she's pissed off and he goes MEMS
or something wrong and she's like well
you know I want to know why I'm below
Barbuda and then he goes back to his car
and he comes back to her and he later
says in a deposition that when he goes
back to his to his vehicle to check on
her license and registration
he begins to develop suspicions that
she's up to no good she's got drugs or
guns and so she comes back and it
commenced to have this increasingly
heated conversation and she lights the
cigarette because she's trying to calm
herself down and this is my point you
and I who grew up in an era where people
smoked all the time know that one of the
principal functions of lighting a
cigarette was to calm your nerves
and in her mind I think in her mind
she's trying to signal to the cop
let's deescalate this and I'm one of the
ways I'm gonna show you that I wanted to
escalate this is I'm going to take a
moment and light a cigarette and just
take it down a notch and let's have a
real conversation he doesn't understand
the meaning of that gesture and he
thinks oh she takes several things he
thinks when she's messing with me she's
defying my authority by lighting a
cigarette she's gonna blow smoke in my
face or something you know nefarious or
she's gonna like take the lighted
cigarette and put it out of my he has
always kind of weird crazy fantasies
this is what he said in a deposition oh
yeah he so even on the level I try and
identify in the book all of the
different ways
and this is when I come back to the case
at the end of the book I go through this
in more detail all the different ways in
which he completely misunderstands her
and one of them is he doesn't understand
the meaning of lighting a cigarette in a
moment of tension and that's you know
still more evidence why you need if
you're a cop or anyone dealing with a
stranger you need to slow down and jot
not jump to any conclusions because
there's so much you can miss what it
seemed to me when I listened to it
initially and then I listed it again in
your audio book there's a thing that
happens with police officers and I've
never been a police officer but I was a
security guard for a brief period of
time and I recognized it and myself and
I recognized in a lot of people that I
work with is that you start treating the
other people like the other like it's us
and them
it was us I worked at great great woods
it's a performance center in Mansfield
Massachusetts like this and we would
catch a lot of people smuggling booze
and things like that and there was an
attitude that you got and I was only
there for one summer but there's an
attitude of they were they were the bad
people and you were the good guys
it was us and them and we stuck together
and they weren't us and cops get that a
hundred times worse because there's guns
involved and they can get shot at we've
all seen videos of God cops pulling
people over and he says can I see your
hands please the guy pulls out a gun and
shoots at them we've all seen those
videos those are this is all always in
the back of the mind of cops yeah and I
think that was just a guy who as you
said 29 years old is a young guy he's
not that bright not good at
communication and he is this attitude
that he's a cop and that you have to
listen to the cops because he's them and
you're you yeah and that that's like
when he's telling her to put the
cigarette out and she's saying I don't
have to do that and he's saying get out
of your vehicle and she's saying I don't
have to do that and then he's screaming
at her I mean that's that's all right
there I mean yeah so it seems like to me
he wants compliance he won't sir to
listen he does yeah he does what he gets
it's funny the
what's remarkable about that tape which
I must have seen 50 times and which has
been viewed on YouTube you know even a
couple million times is how quickly it
escalates you know the whole thing is
it's insanely short yeah you you would
think if I was telling you the story of
this you would think oh this unfolds
over 10 minutes and it doesn't it
unfolds over a minute and a half and
that what I remember years ago I wrote
my second book blink and I have in that
book a chapter about a very famous
infamous police shooting in New York
case of amadou diallo I remember that
remember that was shot like 40 times by
cops yeah and one of the big things I
was interested in talking about in that
case was how long does it take how long
did it take for that whole terrible
sequence to go down so from the moment
the police develop it suspicions about
amadou diallo to the moment that amadou
diallo is lying dead on his front porch
how long how much time elapsed and the
answer is like two seconds
it's boo boo boo it's like and I had a
conversation with them actually here in
the valley with Gavin de Becker has he
ever been on your show
no fascinating guy was a security expert
security expert incredibly interesting
guy's friends with Sam Harris I know
that yes yeah yeah and he was talking
about this question of time that when
you're a security guard guarding someone
you know famous a lot of what you're
trying to do is to inject time into the
scenario instead of you don't want
something to unfold in a second and a
half where you have almost no time to
react properly and what you want to do
is to own it to unfold in five seconds
if you can at all I'm making this up I
can't remember his exact term but
basically what your job is is to add
seconds into the the encounter so that
you have a chance to intelligently
respond to what's going on and so he was
hit this great riff about um how good is
really a secret
Secret Service guys are and one of the
things they do is they're there they're
either not armed or they don't they're
trained not to go for their weapons in
these situations because this point is
so say you're guarding the president
you're a body man for the president you
walk it through a crowd somebody comes
up to you like pulls a gun wants to
shoot the president
his point is if you're the secret
security guy and your first instinct in
response to someone pulling a gun is to
go for your own gun you've lost a second
and a half right your hands got to go
down to here your whole focus is on
getting to your own gun and in the
meantime the other guy whose guns
already out has already shot you've lost
you need to be someone who forgets about
your own gun and just focuses on the on
the man in front of you right and
protected the president but he was all
in the context of time is this really
crucial variable in these kind of
encounters and everything as a police
officer you should be doing is slowing
it down wait I you know
analyze what's happening and that's what
he doesn't do the cop in this instance
speeds it up right he goes to DEFCON you
know she lights a cigarette and
within seconds he's screaming at her
this is like you know a parent shouldn't
do that I mean let alone a police
officer by the side of the highway right
but the difference is he knows she's not
a criminal I mean he must know it's
bullshit he's pulling her over because
he's trying to write a ticket and the
way he's communicating with her when she
lights a cigarette
it's like she's inferior he this is not
someone who's scared he's not scared of
a perpetrator he's not scared that
there's a criminal in the car about to
shoot him he's not scared of that at all
he wants other total complete compliance
and he's talking to her like like he's a
drill sergeant but can't you can't both
those things be true how so well in so
in the deposition he gives which I get
till the end of the book and I got the
tape of the deposition is bad it's
totally fascinating it's like he's
sitting down with the investigating
officer in looking
into the death of Sandra bland and he's
cut I don't know how long it is two
hours now he's walking them through what
he was thinking that day and he makes
the case that he was terrified that he
was convinced he says he goes back to
his squad car comes up and there's
submit there's some evidence to support
this so he pulls her over and he goes to
the passenger side window and leans and
says ma'am you realize why I pulled you
over bla bla ands are you okay because
he she doesn't seem right to him she
gives him her license he goes back to
his squad car and he says while he's in
the squad car
he looks ahead and he sees her making
what he calls furtive movements so he's
like furtive movements also he thinks
she's being all kind of jumpy and you
don't know isn't he just says I saw her
moving around in ways it didn't make me
happy and then when he returns to the
car he returns driver's side which is
crucial because if you're a cop you go
driver's side only if you think that you
might be in danger right he doesn't if
you go driver's side you're exposing
yourself to the road when you reason you
do that is it when your driver's side
you can see the it's very very difficult
if someone has a gun to shoot the police
police officer who's pulled them over if
the police officer is on the driver's
side right you have an angle if they're
on the passenger side so why does he go
but if he thinks she's harmless there's
no reason to go back driver's side I
think this guy I think these two things
are linked I actually believe him he
constructs this ridiculous fantasy about
how she's dangerous but I think that's
just what he was trained to do he's a
paranoid cop
hmm and then why is he's so insistent
that she be compliant for the same
reason because he's terrified he's like
do exactly what I say cuz I don't know
what the what's gonna happen here right
and she's I you know I I don't know I I
I don't think those two those two
strains of of interpretation are
mutually exclusive mmm that's
interesting it didn't sound like he was
scared at all it sounds like he was
pissed that she wasn't listening to him
yeah I didn't I didn't think he sounded
even remotely scared I felt like he had
I mean we're reading into it a try
right I have no idea but from my
interpretation was he had decided that
she wasn't listening to him and he was
going to make her listen to him yeah
that's what I got out of it I didn't get
any fear and I thought that version of
it that he described just sounds like
horseshit it sounds like what you would
say after the fact yeah
to strengthen your case well they so
there's another element here that I get
into which is I got his record as a
police officer he'd been on the on the
force for I forgot nine ten months and
we have a record of every traffic stop
he ever made and when you look at his
list of traffic stops you reason you
realized that what happened that day
with Sandra bland was not an anomaly
that he's one of those guys who pulls
over everyone for bullshit reasons mmm
all day long so I think I've forgotten
exact number but in the hour before he
pulled over Sandra bland he pulled over
for people for other people for equally
ridiculous reasons he's that cop no and
he's that cop because he's been trained
that way right that's kind of quotas
strange strain of modern policing which
says go beyond the ticket pull someone
over if you if anything looks a little
bit weird because you might find
something else now if you look at his
history as a cop he almost never found
anything else his history as a cop
in fact I went through this I forget how
many hundreds of traffic stops he had in
nine months if you go through them he
has like once he found some marijuana on
a kid and by the way the town in which
he was working as a college town so I
mean how hard is that I think he found a
gun once misdemeanor gun but everything
else was like pulling over people for
you know the the light above their
license plate was out got that's the
level of stuff he was using he did this
all day long every day so he's like to
him it's second nature yeah pull her
over like who knows what's going on
she's out of state she's young black
woman was this comparable to the way the
rest of the cops in the force and his
division did it well I looked it I
didn't look at the rest of the cops on
his voice what I looked at were
state numbers to the wherever there
several American states give us like
North Carolina for example will give us
precise complete statistics on the
number of traffic stops done by their
police officers and the reasons for
those stops so when you look at that so
I have the I look at the North Carolina
numbers for example in the North
Carolina Highway Patrol it's the same
thing they're pulling over unbelievable
numbers of people and finding nothing
but night you know one percent less than
one percent hit rates in some cases have
being hit rate being finding something
of interest so like they're pulling over
ninety nine people for no reason order
to find one person who's got you know a
bag of dope or something in the car
you cannot conduct policing in in a
civil society like that and expect to
have decent relationships between law
enforcement and the Sicilian population
yeah no question but doesn't that sort
of support the idea that he's full of
shit that he was really concerned that
she had something he'd never encountered
anything well or or this was the one the
fantasy in his head is so what so the
questions why does he keep doing it if
this is a guy who day in day out pulls
over people for no reason and finds
nothing and continues to do it
now there's two explanations one is he's
totally cynical and thinks this is the
way to be an effective police officer X
mission number two is this is a guy who
has a powerful fantasy in his head that
one day I'm gonna hit the jackpot and
I'm gonna open the trunk and is gonna be
fifteen pounds of heroin and I'm gonna
be the biggest star who ever lived
I think there's also a rush of just
being able to get people to pull over
this the the compliance thing which is
another reason why he was so furious it
what she wasn't listening to him yeah
and she kept a cigarette lit yeah or she
was listening but not complying yes yeah
um what are the laws I mean are you
allowed to smoke a cigarette in your car
when a cop pulls you over how does it
work like that yeah I mean of course
yeah he can't stop you from engaging
they can't tell you to put out your
cigarette there's no law no he could
have said I mean no there's no law I
mean the car though two things the
historically give enormous leeway to the
police officers in a traffic stop as
opposed to a person-to-person stop but
uh but no I mean right this is about
what he should have said is he could
have said ma'am do you mind I would
prefer if you put out the cigarette
while we're talking or I'm allergic to
smoke or whatever I mean he's a million
ways to him to do it nicely he's he's a
jackass about yeah but he he's basically
doing the job like a jackass
he's doing a jackass version of being a
cop well so this is so this is one of a
really really crucial point in the
argument of the book which is I think
the real lesson of that case is not that
he's a bad cop he's in fact doing
precisely as he is was in trained and
instructed to do he's a he's the ideal
cop and the problem is with the
particular philosophy of law enforcement
that has emerged over the last ten years
in this country which has incentivized
and encouraged police officers to engage
in these incredibly low reward
activities like pulling over a hundred
people or defying one person who's done
something wrong that has become
enshrined in the strategy of many police
forces around the country they tell them
to do this I have a whole section of
book right go through in detail one of
the most important police training
manuals which is you know required
reading for somebody coming up and which
they just walk you through this like it
is your job to pull over lots and lots
and lots and lots of people even if you
only find something in a small
percentage of cases why that's what
being a proactive police officer is all
about right so they are trained that
that phrase go beyond the ticket is a is
a term of art in police training like
you got to be thinking you sure you pull
him over for having a taillight that's
out but you're look you're thinking
beyond that is there something else in
the car that's problematic that's to try
to find so there he was being a dutiful
police officer and the the answer is to
re-examine our philosophies of law
enforcement
not no I mean you can't dismiss this
thing by saying oh that's just a
particularly bad cop not great but I
don't know if he's any worse than you
know he's just doing what he was trained
to do that's the issue
he should be trained to summon deference
right that is the issue right the issue
is there this is standard practice to
treat citizens that are doing nothing
wrong as if they're criminals
yeah and pull them over and give them
extreme paranoia and freak them out yeah
how do you find something I was home I'm
Canadian
and I was home in Canada small-town
Canada a couple weeks ago and I saw in
the pack you know how these cars always
have there's often had their slogan on
the side of the car the back of the
commune so in my little hometown in
southwestern Ontario sleepy you know
farm country the slogan on the back of
the police cars is people helping people
so Canadian like the external understand
this is a country with very very low
levels of gun ownership which means that
a police officer does not enter into an
encounter with a civilian with the same
degree of fear or paranoia that the
civilian has a handgun right which is a
big part of this regardless of how one
feels about gun laws in this country the
fact that there are lots of guns mean
makes the job of a police officer a lot
harder and every police officer will
tell you that in Canada the you don't
have that fear but it's also Canada and
its small town Canada and so when you
encounter a police officer in my little
town he's like he's people helping
people he's like he's like driving like
a Camry
and he's you know he's like this genial
person who was a really camera he's I
forgotten exactly what the drivers not
like they're not driving explorers yeah
explorers painted black with like big
bull bars at the front right and then
you go you know I was you go I mean even
in LA you know I like the cars are
painted black and white they don't
really look ferocious I mean the whole
thing that what it is still look
ferocious do I just look they identify
as police to connait to a Canadian looks
to me it looks a little why do they have
to paint them black forgets nothing
Oakland Raiders I mean it's like what do
you think they should pay
something mild in like bright yellow
something lovely something lovely like a
nice can you imagine a teal or a climb
green well that would be yeah because
there's a lot of black cars a lot of
white cars on a lot of teal cars it's
good so it would yeah it would stand out
like oh it's cop this paint car but you
know this kind of symbolism right
matters right right you wanna see an
image sheriff joe arpaio who makes all
those prisoners wear pink yeah yeah
that's kind of thing but I mean to
against his point though how many women
shoot cops
isn't that an insanely low number yeah I
mean insanely low I mean what are the
numbers I mean it's probably almost
non-existent
yeah well guys pull over women I don't
think they're worried about being shot I
really don't I think it's horseshit
I think it's all after the fact yeah he
was trying to concoct some sort of an
excuse it's gonna excuse for um is he
still in the force I know he he's kicked
off for I've forgotten the precise
language they used but for basically
being impolite to a but yeah I don't
think there's a lot of but I don't know
whether I mean I still think we're
saying the same thing which is the thing
that's driving him his motivation is now
rational right and if you were a
rational actor you would never engage in
an activity where 99.9 percent of your
police stops resulted in nothing right
yeah he's he is off in some weird kind
of Fantasyland and for a reason which is
that's what in certain jurisdictions in
this country that's what law enforcement
has come to look at look like yeah
that's that's problematic it's a huge
problem
yeah the powertrip aspect of it I mean
you know I've only often said what would
they do you know because they're certain
that there's certain areas where police
officers do have quotas or they have to
write a certain amount of tickets what
will they do if no one broke the law for
six months welcome to see they should
that's what small-town Canada yeah what
would they do I mean I really be curious
like what would happen to the number so
I
because what you're saying that they use
people as an ATM they really do I mean
people are they're glorified revenue
collectors they're pulling people over
trying to write huge tickets and I
believe is North Carolina where you're
talking about that's got this creepy law
that they've recently I think they've
recently changed it where you're allowed
to just confiscate people's money
because if you see like I pull you over
hey Malcolm why do you have $3,000 on
you yeah
you have $3,000 in cash what are you
doing with $3,000 give me that money and
they take it and you have to prove that
you weren't going to buy heroin or buy
illegal guns or whatever and then most
of that money wound up going to the
police department yeah so they used it
to like build a fucking gym for the cops
or whatever means literally they had an
incentive to keep the money and is that
North Carolina they did that there's a
new civil for people lost yeah yeah and
they're really gross do they still have
that or I mean I know it's check
extremely controversial and people are
up in arms and furious that you know
their money has been stolen people on
their way to buy a car for instance you
know and they get pulled over and a cop
will just take all the money this is
what um I talked a little bit about the
Ferguson case in my book later on
tonight this is what Ferguson was
ultimately about the focus in the
Ferguson case was whether the officer in
that case is Darren Wilson what he
didn't didn't do to Michael Brown but
the real story when the department
justice investigated the real story is
not being counted he knows to it is that
that's that the police department in
Ferguson was being run as a
revenue-generating arm of the city
government and people in city government
were directing the activities of law
enforcement to maximize revenue and this
is incredible stories of there's one
story where there's a guy who's just
been playing basketball and he's sitting
in his car parked by the basketball
court like cooling off after play
basketball cop rolls in pulls up behind
him and ends up writing eight tickets
including accuses the guy being a
pedophile
gets him for one of the things he gets
him is putting a false name on his
driver's license when his driver's
license his real name was like Michael
and his driver's license said Mike like
that's the level of eight tickets right
that was routine practicing so you you
know you there's a reason why a kid like
Michael Brown in Ferguson is gets really
angry at law enforcement because law
enforcement was a completely discredited
institution in that city for years and
years and years and years and years they
had been basically praying they'd been
preying on the on the lower-income
community of that town and so of course
relationships between the population and
the cops had reached a low ebb that's a
real you know there's a it's funny the
one of the reasons I want to write this
book was then the the kind of
conversations we have around these
things frozen's a great example
ninety five percent of the conversation
about Ferguson was just about trying to
break down what happened between the cop
and Michael Brown and the issue when we
finally look at in a systematic manner
we realized oh no no it's not about that
it is about a system that had been in
place for years and years and years and
years in which the the the
african-american population in that town
had been preyed upon by the police
department that is the broader and you
cannot come to an understanding of what
happened with Michael Brown until you're
willing to engage that case on that much
more broader systemic level hmm when you
make the title of this book talking to
strangers are you do you have a goal
that you're trying to achieve are you
trying to illuminate certain aspect of
communication you're trying to highlight
issues that people have had with these
stories like the Michael Brown story or
yeah I mean I'm trying to I wanted to
start with the premise of why are we so
bad at you know like I tell the story in
a book of the Larry Nasser case at
Michigan State which ones is the guy
remember the doctor for the gymnastics
oh it turns out to have been
millena file yeah you Jennifer so there
you have a case where everyone thinks
they know this guy he's their friend
he's this gifted doctor the parents are
willingly bringing their kids to to be
treated by him the parents are in the
room while he is abusing their kids and
they don't see it the kids are saying
something were to happen and the parents
are dismissing it so I wanted to that's
a good example of a phenomenon that I
wanted to try and explain which is how
is that possible how can we think we
know someone and be so completely wrong
how can you take your kid to a doctor
and think the doctor is the greatest
possible doctor and in fact what he's
doing is abusing your child in front of
you right and that's a very similar kind
of problem to Bernie Madoff people
invested their life savings with this
guy not not little old ladies in Dubuque
sophisticated savvy incredibly
intelligent investors handed over
millions of dollars to this guy who was
not even true I mean the Madoff fraud
was so outrageous he didn't even bother
to and he didn't even put it in t-bills
I mean he just spent it it was just like
crazy what's T bills Treasury bills
oh I mean he was David he was he was a
100 percent sociopath fraud yes and
people over the course of 20 years wrote
check after check after check after
check to him thinking was this brilliant
investor you know that's a puzzle that's
what I wanted to get my people did
recognize as something was wrong right
there were financial analysts that were
saying that this doesn't make sense a
few of them but it's funny there's a my
favorite story on the in the Madoff
chapter is the greatest hedge fund in
the world is Renaissance technologies
these are the guys out in Long Island
who have had like 30% returns for 25
years they're like all PhD are you know
AI genius literally geniuses
and they found themselves yours before
betaf was busted they found themselves
with I think thirty million dollars you
know madoff fund because of some
complicate transaction and they're all
geniuses so they look at what Madoff's
doing or like and I don't look good like
that doesn't make any sense to me and so
like what should we do we have thirty
million dollars stake in a fund and we
don't understand what the guys doing and
you would think logically they would
sell their stake they don't cuz it's
returning no it in fact it's not even
returning that their own legit returns
are twice his illegitimate returns there
may be only they actually make the point
that his returns are really low for us
like there's no reason for us to keep
their money but they don't sell what so
that's what I was trying understand like
they can't even you know there's this
notion I talking on because it's called
default to truth which is this idea from
a researcher called Tim Levine which is
as human beings we're trusting engines
we are evolved to give people the
benefit of the doubt and once you
understand that and why do we do that
because it's the right move 99% of the
time most people are being truthful and
if you have as your strategy I'm gonna
believe what people say it makes you a
fantastic friend or wonderful person to
work with it means you can you know
scape through the world with a minimum
of fuss if you're the paranoid person is
a person whose life is a nightmare right
because they are suspicious of
everything that moves
so we evolved to be trusting engines
because that makes your life easier
that's the best part of human people
want to mate with you like if you won't
talk in evolutionary terms about who
passes on their genes nice people pass
on their genes given the choice between
having a child with a crazy suspicious
paranoid person or a loving trusting
person you choose the loving trusting
person a hundred percent of the time so
multiply out times a million years of
human history you realized trusting
genes beat paranoid genes every other
week right so that's what we are we're
credulous by by by evolutionary choice
so those guys at in the Renaissance
they're they're no different they may be
smarter than the rest of us but they're
not constructed
differently their inclination is to
believe people and like well I don't
know guy says he's a good investor man
why not let's hang on to it see what
happens right that's their motive they
don't they don't you don't get to run a
organization as successful as
Renaissance Technologies if you're some
crazy paranoid person right how would
you even invest in anything if you were
crazy and paranoid there was a lot of
people that were really intelligent and
invested in Bernie Madoff hedge fund to
Steven Spielberg was one of them he lost
a shit ton of money oh yeah I mean look
at the roster list there isn't it you
cannot point to an unsophisticated
investor on the list of people who lost
the most money from every one of the
most smart that's strange it's so great
it is great like think about it like and
by the way getting a decent return in
the market is super easy you you go to
you know Vanguard and they you know
they'll give you the market return
you're in your si tard but these people
like they wanted to do something fancier
and they and that's what happened well
he when you realized what a sociopath he
actually was he is in the interviews
after he's caught or he's demanding
certain things and complaining about
certain things he doesn't seem to have
any remorse yeah then he wants better
treatment he wants better food he
doesn't seem to have any remorse that
he's you know literally robbed people of
their retirement yeah
ruined the last part of their lives
where they thought they were gonna have
a considerable sum of money to sit back
and just enjoy their grandchildren no
now they're broke you know there's
another poor yeah and now they have to
figure out a way to get by and eat he
doesn't give a shit he did he doesn't in
fact what's weird there's so many things
weird about the Madoff case one of them
is we forget that he doesn't get caught
he turns himself in right and he turns
himself in because not because he's
screwing up but because he's
quote-unquote so good
remember the financial crisis hits in
2008 and his clients are losing so much
money on their legit investments that
they go to man up and say can I have
some of my money back from you I got to
pay off all the stuff I've done that
it's gone sour so like in effect no one
ever caught him he gets caught by a
once in a you know one-in-a-million
circumstance where he's the only one
making any money for his client so they
come after him my point is if you if
you're totally rational and you look at
this you say here's a guy who managed to
bamboozle the most sophisticated people
in the world to the tune of billions of
dollars for 25 years he only gets caught
because we had a once-in-a-lifetime
financial meltdown isn't the rational
lesson of that that we should all be
Bernie Madoff's
right he's like super easy it's like not
that hard I could all I have to do is
you know he dressed really nicely
I get really nice office space on the
east side of Manhattan what what did he
actually do nothing it really didn't
invest in anything he just moved other
people's money around and he ran a Ponzi
scheme he spent a lot of it and how does
his sons not catch on to this that's a
good question
cuz they're not being but one of them
committed suicide Breyer that's right
and then so it's an open question of how
much they do how much anyone else knew I
you know the older I get the more I
believe in the powers of particularly
within within family denial is something
now I don't find hard to believe hmm
so your ability I've now heard so many
stories of you know a parent is some
kind of monster
and family members just won't see it
they just can't bring themselves to go
that so did they know something everyone
knew there was something slightly fishy
and what Bernie was doing but it never
went so far as to think that he was just
making it up so they knew something was
up but they didn't know it was a hundred
percent horseshit
they thought that he was so there were
some people thought that he actually had
investments but he was there was a
suspicion for example he was
front-running that because he had a
larger business managing the the deal
flow and the Nasdaq that he would get
advanced word of where money was flowing
and he would jump ahead of the queue buy
stocks before other people did and
profit off the when the stock would rise
he would just sell and profit off that
difference
so there was a feeling that he had a
dubious kind of illegitimate strategy
that nonetheless legitimately made him a
lot of money so people like well if so
long as he can get away with it
and I could profit off it I'm fine right
but the truth is he wasn't doing that at
all and truth is he was just he was he
had as he had some Confederate in the
Attic of his company essentially making
up trade orders from scratch I mean they
were just making shit up did how many
people got arrested I forget I think
they took I can't remember the exact
number I think they got he had two
Confederates I think and went down with
him that's it I think that's what it was
in retrospect it's a really it's one of
these crazy it's one of these crazy
you'd think it you know that whole
institutions would have fallen yes no
did you ever hear the conversation that
he had I believe it was recorded somehow
on a phone or something or maybe was
after he was in jail we was talking
about trying to get money back from one
of his biggest investors the guy had
gotten like a billion dollars from him
over the years that's right yeah he's
like you got to give the money back he's
like fuck you I'm not giving you shit
yeah and you know that this is crazy
conversation where he's basically
telling this guy look you knew this was
bullshit
and you were making money off this and
now you know yeah yeah so so this is
like the clever so you think about this
that guy I know you Zack were you
talking about yeah so so game the Stu
let's let's just do it let's do a um a a
hypothetical scenario okay you have a
friend who's an incredible salesman and
has gone around Europe and Saudi Arabia
and raised a twenty million dollar fund
20 billion dollar fund and they're
promising a twenty percent of return a
year on your investment right so you
give him a million you're getting two
hundred thousand dollars a year back
from this thing you know it's all
bullshit but no one else does what is
the rational thing for you to do the
rational thing for you to do is to take
your on your million dollar investment
is to take the two hundred thousand
dollars that is May made in quotation
marks every year out of the fund so you
say most people you know when you invest
in stock
not only what you do is you check the
box I want my I want any dividends or
earnings reinvested in the fund don't
check the box take the real cash so if
you're investing with this phony friend
of yours for 20 years you're gonna get
$200,000 a year for 20 years that's four
million dollars you will make four
million clear of your out of your 1
million initial investment in in 20
years right that's smart if you know
what's going on so that's what some
people did with Madoff they're like yeah
I don't know what he's doing these
returns are pretty fantastic I'm just
gonna take all my earnings off the table
every single year so they are the ones
who the real winners of this whole thing
with those people yes this money is not
real that money's coming from other
investors it's nothing's being made
actually what happens with them like if
a guy does make all these millions of
dollars like that one guy he had to so
give some of it back yeah so what
happens is they appoint remember they
appoint a after the scandal breaks and
made-up is invested they bring in a kind
of supervisor financial supervisor who
has the power to clawback winnings from
the money from the people who took who
took cash off the table so but not
everyone had to claw back and the
question was how far back do we go so if
you were investing if you were investing
with Madoff 25 years ago and you took
you know 10 million off the table
between 1990 and 1993 do you have to
give that up to like it gets complicated
also how can you prove that he was doing
the same activity but exactly exactly oh
it's a conversation I really wish I
could remember where I was hearing this
conversation but somebody had recorded
Madoff talking to this guy telling him
look you got to give that money back
yeah yeah yeah my Schwab fund looks
better and better a little time it's
just so scary to me that mean finances
in the stock market and all that stuff
has always looked like magic like what
is going on there what do they do
moving these numbers around like when
you see the ticker tape roll by like
what what is all that if you don't have
any understanding of it it's like a
foreign language yeah and so you're
hoping that all these geniuses can't be
duped all these people throwing their
tickets up in the air and everybody
there's a buy-sell they all know what's
going on you don't know what's going on
but hey there's a lot of things you know
that they don't know and this is just
how the world works yeah turns out no
turns out the people that were involved
in this crazy very difficult to
understand thing didn't know it either
yeah like they barely can understand it
and this guy was just stealing money in
some weird way and if the stock market
didn't crash if we didn't have some sort
of a depression who knows how long he
might still be an operation today he
would so without without the crash of
2008 there's a very very strong
possibility that bernie madoff would
still be going gangbusters all he has to
do to keep surviving is to take in
enough money to cover withdrawals yeah
so there's some like we said there's a
some portion of people who withdrawing
their winnings he just needs to make
enough to get new enough new money to
cover their withdrawal so he's got a
fifty billion dollar hedge fund and
let's imagine there's a billion in
withdrawals coming out every year he's
gotta raise a billion now if you're
Bernie and you already have 50 it's not
that hard to raise another and
particularly because he had people all
around the world and he was giving them
the huge fees to raise money for him so
that's the other way that the people who
really made money from him were the
people who had I forgot what it was but
you would be say your your your Joe the
financial guy in Zurich you have a whole
bunch of wealthy European clients Bernie
would let for every for every million
you raise for Bernie Bernie would let
you keep I forgot what it was a hundred
grand that's a nice business that's real
money yes you just kick back 900 to
Bernie and keep a hundred grand and that
your feet free and clear no one's
calling that back right those guys got
very very very well very very wealthy oh
that's weird money you're sitting in
your house that stealing built
that's got to be strange so what can be
learned in terms of communication from
the Bernie Madoff story well the the
Brody made-up story and all you know all
of these ways but this one in particular
goes to this question of we really think
we're good at spotting liars and we're
not so virtually every profession that
is invested in you know in an
investigation of human beings has some
belief that you know we know how to
figure out is like yes and the truth is
nobody does and if someone tells you
they are good at spotting Liars there's
a 99% chance that they're lying the
evidence the the so if you could think
if we did an experiment here where I had
a hundred people parade through this
office right now the studio right now
and every one of them made a statement
in front of you and some were lying on
someone to tell the truth and I asked
you Joe tell me who's lying is not yours
accuracy rate your success rate would be
52 to 54 percent in other words slightly
better than chance you might as well
flip a coin it's slightly but if you
don't and that's not about you anyone in
that chair watching these people parade
in front of us is gonna do a slightly
bit better than chance and the reason
was slightly better than chance is there
are a small fraction of people who are
such epically bad Liars that there's
just we're not gonna lose those people
like we those are obvious one thing that
you can tell those if it's an area of
your own personal expertise right like
if someone tried to talk to you about
what it takes to write a book and get a
book published and get a book on the New
York Times bestseller list and they were
just making things up you would you
would okay so that so this is oh he said
now you we talk about a separate thing
he's specialist that's content-based so
if I pretend to be a UFC fighter
you're gonna spot my liar my lies in
five minutes because you know more about
the content than I do but let's remove
but there you're not catching me because
I look like I'm lying you're catching me
because I'm saying something that's
bullshit I have a good story about that
I really I
good story I used to think that I was
really good at spotting liars and then I
met this guy I met him through a friend
and that's I've given myself a pass and
then I met him through this friend he
was a friend of a friend so I just
assumed he was okay because my friend is
a very good friend and this guy was
claiming to be this Brazilian jiu-jitsu
blackbelt and he was writing for this
online magazine that was like a well
read magazine in the martial arts world
and it was the Abu Dhabi combat club
they were responsible for this big the
Abu Dhabi submission World Championships
is the biggest championships in the
world is very highly regarded high
prestige this guy was talking about
these fights that he had had and you
know people bullshit a little bit so you
give people a little bit of room for
that but then he was talking about this
particular particular move that he had
pulled off in a fight that he had just
learned from my friend and it's a very
difficult move it's called the twister
it's basically a guillotine from
wrestling and it's set up from position
called side control it's really
complicated you have to wrap someone's
leg around you have to roll onto your
left shoulder you have to get behind
them you have to grab their arm put it
over your shoulder grab ahold of their
spine and it's essentially like a spine
lock it's a very difficult move to pull
off and it takes a long time to master
to the steps it takes a long time to
understand the position so this guy
learned it and then a couple days later
claimed to have pulled it off in
Thailand and it was like it's like one
of those scenes in a movie with a wretch
record scratches and everybody just goes
what and I remember we were like what's
going on so then my friend winds up
rolling with him rolling his sparring
it's you do Jiu Jitsu rowing and he
comes back to me he goes there's no
fucking way that guy's a black belt it
doesn't even make sense
he goes he's like he doesn't know what
the fuck he's doing like this is really
weird so he winds up having this
confrontational conversation with him on
the phone while I'm in the car he's
talking to him he goes I want to know
what you are because you're not a
fucking black ball so tell me what's
going on he says hey no no my black belt
in Japanese jujitsu it's
it's now time goes out wait he tells
this guy to go fuck himself time goes on
the guy winds up killing someone
he winds up murdering this girl that
he's having sex with murdering her
husband and he gets caught driving
around hurt his car the guys car after
he's killed the guy and then he winds up
trying to recruit a friend to kill
someone there's like this whole big
thing and he winds up going to jail and
he's in jail now but I remember thinking
okay you don't know shit about catching
and spotting Liars cuz you didn't you
didn't spot that guy's being completely
full of shit like I thought it was a
little full of shit but I didn't know he
was a like a complete sociopath and a
murderer yeah yeah so this is an
interesting question using that scenario
would you have done a better job if all
I gave you was the transcript of this
guy speech so there's this is a there's
a lot of interest in this question the
community of people who study deception
so there's many different I can suppose
I'm trying to improve my ability to spot
lies I can we can do three things I can
listen to you face-to-face as you're
telling me something is either true or
false
I can we could do this entirely on the
telephone so I don't see you I just hear
you or I can just read the transcript of
what you say and try to decide whether
it's true or false and it seems to be
the case that we're better when we just
when we remove sight and sound and all
we have are this the word two plain
words on the page hmm there was that
there is what being present does is it
introduces all kinds of of noisy
information that just distracts us from
the core question of whether the truth
is being told so maybe it was maybe if
all you had was a transcript and as this
guy is describing this particular what
was the name of the movie it's a twister
the twister
maybe as you're looking at the way he
just doing is focusing on the precise
way in which he describes this very very
intricate move and you would realize Oh
he actually doesn't understand what he's
talking about and you would have seen it
clearly in that moment if you but maybe
there was something about his
presentation that threw you off the
scent
it was the move itself see because if he
just said oh I got I got the guy in an
armbar well a lot of people catch people
in arm bars it's it's a very common move
you learn it first day of jujitsu yeah
you can catch someone someone makes a
mistake in you're a white belt and they
reach up and you grab their arm you can
catch an armbar yeah
twister is very difficult to pull off
very difficult yeah it's only been done
in the UFC maybe once I think chan-sung
Jung the Korean Zombie pulled it off
once he may be the only guy maybe one
other guy ever yeah this guy was
delusional
so it was horseshit and the only thing
that we were taking into consideration
like he was fight supposedly fighting in
Thailand which turns out there was no
fight at all he's a complete liar yeah
the only thing that we were taking into
consideration was maybe this guy fought
a scrub like he could have fought
someone who really didn't know anything
he said let me try the twister on him
but then that's like you'd have to be
beating the guy so badly you just would
end the fight you wouldn't do a twister
on him the only time you do it twisters
if you're a highly skilled grappler and
you think you could put someone in the
position that they don't understand it's
a confusing position it's a position
that there's a common position called
the back mount where you would choke
someone or you would transition to other
moves from there and he was almost there
but not quite there because you're
caught you're kind of on the side so
even seasoned grapplers occasionally
make mistakes and get caught in a
twister but you have to be a fucking
wizard to pull that off on somebody yeah
it's not something you have to be really
good it's not something that you can
just do so when he said he did it we
were all like what if he said he had
kicked the guy in knocked him out oh
that well that happens all the time he
said he punched the guy hit him with an
elbow and cut him the referee stopped
the fight all that stuff is real that
happens all the time he chose this one
signature move of my friend Eddie and we
were both like there's something wrong
here
yeah something wrong here there's a
hilarious version of this on kind of a
runner and on all the the running
message board is one called let's run
which is sisters and they're constantly
catching people who lie about their
marathon times it's hot it's a hilarious
well there's all kinds of reasons but a
lot of it is it starts with the eyeball
test so they'll be up you know because a
lot of marathons have they take pictures
of the participants at various points
during the race mm-hmm and someone will
claim to run like a 240 marathon now 240
you do really good run it's not world
class or name to be serious to run 240
so they'll eyeball someone who claims to
run 240 to say now but I mean you start
looking at them 10 pounds extra pounds
right there they should be they should
look like they've been running they look
totally fresh as a daisy right now
they're what are they doing wearing no
shoes no 240 marathon you know it's like
is that kind of process and then goes
the second order where they do
complicated analysis of splits and they
do all this kind of thing but it often
begins with the same thing it's like
these guys trying to claim to be this no
no no right that's not working that's
like a I love those in cidery well I
have this thought about how much culture
shifted through the internet and how
much culture will shift again in even
more astronomical way once we can read
minds and I don't think we're far away
from that I think we're a few decades
away from some technology that allows
people to establish intent and to see
thoughts and I think they're very
there's some sort of theoretical work
they're doing on this right now and
there's there's different models that
they're trying to achieve I think that's
going to eliminate a lot of the bullshit
of communication and I think it's gonna
happen really quickly just like Google
sort of eliminates a lot of the bullshit
of people telling stories about
something that someone goes why what
happened
wait a minute what year and they go good
that didn't happen and they can find out
like almost instantaneously I think
we're gonna be able to figure that out
with people I think there's going to be
a way where you can where we can see
intent and we can read minds
I don't think we're far away from that
yeah I mean I known this neural link
thing with Elan mush is very Elon is
very hush-hush about this is different
sort of electronic brain interfaces that
they're trying to experiment with yeah
who wouldn't wouldn't you worry be that
if we read we're able to read someone's
thoughts mm-hmm intentions what we would
in fact discover is even more confusing
than what we know now in other words
maybe what's inside my head right now
are 35 different thoughts and intentions
warring at with each other
murder scenarios yes mercenary then
Malcolm just sort of keeps everything
normal I think it's totally true think
about it most of us there's any number
of things think about that yes the list
of the list of possible things that
could come out of my mouth at this very
moment is infinite mm-hmm right it is
evident there are at this very moment
God knows how many scenarios swirling
around my head about what should I say
next right right and why is my intention
to try and make you laugh to impress you
to piss you off to disagree with you to
agree with you I mean it we can go on
and on yeah all those are in play so you
really want to look inside my head and
get you're not gonna get clarity yeah
it's gonna be a mess or we're gonna
realize we're all a mess yes like it'll
make us feel a little bit better like oh
everybody's out of their fucking mind
but what you want that yes you would yes
come on endlessly curious about I know
my mind is such a mess and there's so
much chaos going on there I want to know
what's going on in other people's I want
to know how fucked up am i or am i
normal mmm oh yeah is it so standard
here's my fear I had many fears about
this kind of thing but my fear would be
as follows that um I cannot count the
number of times where I have had
reactions to things that people have
said in the moment that turn out to be
wrong deeply and badly wrong right and
one of the things that I have learned as
an adult is too deeply distrust those
kinds of reactions and to wait and very
often what will happen in my case
sometimes the waiting takes so long
I'm the kind of person who sometimes a
month will pass and I will think back on
a situation and I'll think oh my god
I totally misunderstood that this person
who I thought was a jackass is actually
someone you know a lovely person who
wanted to give a second chance to or
whatever that comment that someone made
that I thought was stupid is in fact
extremely thoughtful and insightful this
will happen in weeks months later
whatever if you were able to read my
mind in a moment you would judge me for
my mistake and not give me an easy way
to correct it and it was you would trap
me in like what if this would have had a
reaction to something you said in this
conversation in which I said Jesus I
can't believe that that's dumb and then
I'm driving back to LA tonight and I
think oh actually oh that's really
interesting I thought about the time I
don't want you to short-circuit my
learning process about you I want I want
to give me the privacy of my my six
hours of thinking about what you said
and allow me give me that kind of time
to come to a reasoned and insightful
conclusion about how I feel that's
interesting but we're talking then about
only one person having the technology
because if you both have the technology
and there wouldn't be any issue you
wouldn't be confusion as to why someone
was saying something you'd you've a much
clearer path to understanding their
thought process and their intent behind
it really yeah I mean if one person has
it right then yeah I get it
yeah if I could read your mind oh I said
something and Malcolm thinks I'm a
retard like you know there's that but
there's another there's another
possibility that both people have it and
this is also one of the things that
would be fascinating about this is one
of the things about forbidden words is
forbidden words carry with them intent
they have automatic intent right but you
can say the exact same word and have
different intent behind it if we could
understand clearly what your intent is
mm-hm
then taboo words would automatically
become meaningless
mean it's not about sound you make it's
not about forbidden sounds always
what it's about is thoughts yeah and
what you're trying to convey and what's
happening to you as a human being who
are you like what what what is your
process for the way you communicate what
is your process for the way you're
trying to develop these thoughts in your
mind and express them to people
well well part of the problem with that
is language right and part of the
problem with making certain aspects of
our language forbidden is you limit
people's ability to colorfully
communicate and express themselves in
certain ways mm-hmm I think that alone
just eliminating that alone eliminated
and confusion and also highlighting you
know you could highlight real problems
with people's thoughts
and the way people communicate but also
eliminate many problems and say oh he
doesn't mean that like you could see
what he means like this is what this is
where his mind is you could see you
could literally see the thoughts yeah
yeah I guess I would also I mean let me
get let me throw out another
complicating factor it still leaves the
question of cultural context yes so of
course one of the things I got really
interested when I was writing my book
was how are kind of cultural frames of
reference profoundly complicate our
attempts to understand other people and
so in your scenario where I have some
kind of window into your thinking and
intention I still need to know in order
to make sense of you I still need to
have a very clear idea of the the
cultural kind of rules of the road that
you use mmm and they're likely to be
different from mine
sure particularly if you know I mean I'm
in Canadian you're not but imagine if
the difference between us was more
profound if our eyes you know then you
you're still like like I was there's a
really cool thing I've been obsessed
with um with memory I'm doing only seems
I'm memory in my in revisions history
this coming season and I was reading
about this really fascinating experiment
which is done with Korean and American
college students adults essentially and
what I do is I give you
circles paper circles and one is past
one is present when his future and I say
those are three concepts represent those
three concepts with these three circles
so the American kid has passed here
present in the middle future over on the
right right three independent circles
the Korean kid
puts all piles all three circles on top
of each other now what does that mean I
don't know what that means
I mean something interesting right it
means that they don't they're not
separating these three modes the way
that we are they're certainly coming at
experience with a very different set of
assumptions so maybe so I think of the
Civil War's a long time ago but if I'm
Korean maybe the Civil War is as present
in my kind of consciousness as something
that happened last week is that maybe
that's not what that means I'm not
exactly sure I'm sort of guessing
because I don't know that I haven't
fully investigated but the point is
there are I've just given you one random
example there are way way incredibly
different rules that different cultures
use to organize experience so if I'm
looking at you and reading your thoughts
I have to know those rules because those
rules are sorting out how people so this
is only this is not not - I'm not
dissing this notion of that you're
talking about I'm saying that it needs
to have another layer as well a cultural
level a culture of l'air we just kind of
alerts me to how you're organizing
experience that certainly makes sense
it's it's interesting when you think
about like the Tower of Babel right like
this this idea that one point in time
everyone spoke the same language and God
sort of set it up so that it was we're
never going to be able to really
communicate with each other because
everybody has a bunch of different
languages and we'll never figure it out
that's the sort of mm-hmm
crunched up version of it if there was a
way to change the way like all languages
are essentially little symbols that are
written down on paper or typed out
and then sounds you make with your mouth
and they convey intent if there was a
way to do another version of language a
universal version of language that's
eventually adopted but I'm reading this
book about these people that were
kidnapped by Native Americans and they
were assimilated into the tribes that
learned the language and this happened
over a course of a couple of years and I
was thinking like what would that be
like if you you know that's how you
learn a language you're kidnapped by oh
you know I mean yeah like you got it but
if there was a new language how long
would it take for adults to learn a new
language if someone came up with a new
language of completely universal
characters and this language is conveyed
through this technology rather than
through your mouth so it's your your
your thoughts your thoughts interface
with some sort of technology
it creates whatever hieroglyphs some
sort of visual language that we all
agree upon and then this is universal
this is universal throughout all
cultures yeah and the only thing that
we'd be confused about assumptions and
rules as far as like what's okay well
you do that can't we kind of do that
already in a sense that we could have a
universal language and then we have a
device you know sitting on our phone or
something yeah that when we I'm in you
know I'm in some for I'm in Bulgaria
mm-hmm and I'm ordering coffee I speak
it into the device and it simply
translates either translates me directly
into Bulgarian that's actually not that
hard no or it translates this into this
common language that the Bulgarian
translator services and if you think of
the technology at a sudden more advanced
level that is now it could be done in a
very seamless way like he doesn't have
to be some bulky box mm-hmm it could
literally be that I am speaking in
English and what you're hearing is
there's a filter and what you're what
you're hearing is this other language I
mean well don't don't Google buds or
whatever they are the air you know the
air pod version of those Google things I
think there's something some
technology that actually enables you to
instantaneously translate that yeah I'm
doing for you yeah although you hate for
Google to have one more thing over us
right it's like not enough that they
should control nine-tenths of our life
yeah well we're also gonna let them
control our communication I remember as
a kid reading I used to love doonesbury
did you yes and there's a hilarious
thing in doonesbury where I forgot who
hung chol Duke or somebody is going to
China and his uncle Duke Hunter as
Thompson yeah it was and he was
appointed ambassador I think he was
imported American ambassador to China
and and that was a joke and he would go
and he would meet with like they had a
you know the president China and he
would say the most incredibly incendiary
outrageous things and the translator
never chance anybody said would turn he
would say this a radius offensive thing
and the translator was saying you know
the flowers are blooming today yeah
Jamie had a thought once that
hieroglyphs for 2019 are essentially
emojis yeah well it's kind of what's
your sort of was saying it yeah like the
internet you have to translate English
into bits mm-hmm and where for the
computer to translate it into an emoji
it's almost I feel like it's almost what
you're saying although it's not exactly
it's a being is a beginning stuff yeah
it's one - yeah it just seems like this
is not the best we can do noise noises
with your mouth and then you know
learning English is incredibly
complicated for someone who speaks
Mandarin advice averse yeah it's all
very what if we we all said hey look
this is some new version of a language
like whenever there's uh whether it's
contact or whenever there's some movie
about extraterrestrials is always a team
of scientists and linguists and geniuses
to get together and they go look we're
gonna establish a universal language
they communicate with these people and
Close Encounters of the Third Kind it
was music dude dude dude and do that
they would figure out some way we're
gonna figure out a way to talk if we had
some enormous financial incentive or
some enormous crisis was in play and we
had to all communicate with
language and so remember when they were
trying to push them while you from
Canada the the metric system was
actually real over there you know when I
was in high school they were trying to
push the metric system yeah and I
remember there was like a concerted
effort they're like we're gonna have to
learn the metric system because a
universal system that the whole world
uses and they gave up the United States
Divac why did why was this possible in
Canada not possible in United States
because we're assholes
you guys are 20% less assholes at least
20% there I don't know how's that
possible
I've always thought the exact grew up in
Boston which is also cold
I always thought cold weather made
assholes cuz it's like you just like
fuck it's called fuck that fuck you fuck
you cuz Boston is filled with people
that want to get drunk and fight and
then a lot of them are really mean which
is a great place to grow up you develop
a thick skin and particularly as a
comedian it's a great place to start out
and do comedy we're gonna learn how to
do it right I don't think Boston is mean
because of the cold I think yeah I think
it's Canadian well the coldest parts of
Canada like the you know I know lots of
people lots of members of my family are
from Winnipeg which is seriously cold
nicest people nicest people yeah it
doesn't make any sense that's why I said
it does that my theory sucks yes I think
it's the children of very rough
immigrants and they stayed in these
communities and there it goes
yes exactly that's what I am yeah so the
the immigrants of these people that were
willing to take a risk and get on a boat
when there wasn't even YouTube videos to
watch yeah these are savage people that
made it over here and they're really
rough and they had rough childhoods and
they raised rough children and the
echoes of that persist on the east coast
of the United States see the amount of
drinking that went on in Irish immigrant
communities is there's it's funny
because I stumbled across years ago I
was I've always been obsessed with
drinking alcohol I think I've chapter
that on it in this book but um so years
ago turns out that the place in America
where alcohol studies as they're called
we're really birthed was New Haven which
makes pretend attitude yeah makes
perfect sense
so in the 50s a bunch of people get
really really interested in
understanding how drinking works and it
in New Haven of course you have the
perfect model because you have two very
large groups of immigrants you have
Irish Italians right in all of New
England you've got those two to work
with and of course they could not be
more different in the way they drink so
even in immigrant Italian communities in
the 50s these are people who are in
terms of volume of alcohol consumed way
up at the top they are drinking with
every meal they're making you know wine
and have been in your backyards they are
but the levels of alcoholism are
infinitesimal the amount of like social
dysfunction associated with drinking
camp I mean it's just not it's
negligible these are the healthiest
drinkers you can imagine side by side
are the Irish and I don't need to tell
you that story is very different
why is it it's super interesting
question
you've got so they're not one groups not
richer than the other they come to
America not at the same time but there
are 19th century early 20th century come
to American large numbers there are some
you know Irish culture looks a lot but
it was Catholic right now there may be
Catholic in different ways but there's a
sir on the surface these are you'd think
that they would use the bottle in the
same way no the Irish are the the Irish
the men are slinking off to the pub and
in Italy everyone's gathered around
steaming bowls of pasta and drinking
like one and a half glasses of wine mild
homemade wine with your dinner it's like
night and day
yeah it's unbelievable is it because one
is a whiskey culture because whiskey's
rough stuff I mean you really can't have
much before you're off the rails yeah
there there's some of that yeah the the
attachment to wine in the Italian
community probably saves them a good
deal of their of alcohol-related
heartbreak I don't know too much about
the actual the is there a difference
between the way different alcohol
effects is that does the wine alcohol
actually affect you by volume by
by the actual percentage of alcohol does
it affect you differently than beer or
differently than whiskey or differently
in tequila cuz that's what people always
say oh if I drink tequila I get crazy
like people always have these stories
but is that true if you have you had a
certain percentage of alcohol yes we
equalize the the alcohol concentration
is it all the same in you yes because
for me wine makes me warm and friendly
and it makes me sleepy and it mean it
doesn't make me energetic whiskey makes
me crazy like I think it's a crazy drug
I think when people drink shots of Jack
Daniels they just want to go whoa they
want to get correct they want to do dumb
shit it makes them want to do dumb
things shots in particular makes people
want to do dumb things makes people get
crazy makes you Balad that makes people
Irish right Ben are you saying well I
mean quarter Irish get away with it for
a little while only a quarter that's it
yeah mostly Italian oh I see you're at
the cusp of these two drinking today yes
yes well I see but Rogan you're foolish
you're fooling this was Rogan yes yes
because if we would think that you were
majority Irish with that yes yeah and I
could be dark Irish if you looked at my
view yeah I'm well I'm you know I'm a
reserved English and Jamaican Jamaicans
not big drinkers you know in the same
kind of the difference actually
fascinatingly of the many weird alcohol
facts if you look at young people it's
like looks like a college-age young
people in America and look at their
drinking habits the black students drink
and get drunk markedly less than white
kids real differences in drinking
behavior by race in at that age Asian
students don't drink much either
drinking is like a cycle it's like a
white thing it's like a crazy white
thing increasingly you know or
problematic drinking I've always thought
that was fascinating his first name I
don't know I don't know the I don't know
why that's
so is it it's revered in our culture
more it's uh yeah I mean getting fucked
up is celebrated in white culture well
this you know in the alcohol chapter of
my book the I talk about all the strange
things that have happened with drinking
patterns on campus and I was struck in
doing that chapter I was interested in
the connection between drinking and
drunkenness and sexual assault on campus
because all of those the overwhelming
majority he talked to people who study
sexual assault on campus they will tell
you that you almost never see one of
these cases where both parties aren't
drunk right it's which doesn't explain
them entirely but it's a huge factor in
making sense of what happens and when
you dig into that you see these like
really weird patterns first up when I
was in college I did not know and I went
to college in Canada not a teetotaling
population I did not know a single
person who had ever been drugged
blackout drunk and then now if you talk
to a 20 year old college student in
America they will name friends of theirs
who get blackout drunk on a weekly basis
what is the drinking age in Canada and
what was it when you were in college
when as ecology was 18 yeah I think that
might be a big factor I've been talking
to friends about this about Europe about
how in Europe particularly in Italy and
France you're a lot of drink wine at a
very young age yeah and the taboo aspect
of it forbidden fruit all that goes away
it's a just it's a I don't think young
kids should be drinking because I think
it's terrible for your brain development
but I think there's a thing in keeping
them from drinking or making it illegal
where it becomes so taboo and so
intoxicating that they can't wait until
they can legally do it or they try to
get a hold of it before it's legal and
it has a certain excitement to it that
just doesn't it doesn't have in parts of
Europe yeah you've given it up kind of
so there's all kinds of the things that
are new are way less beer and way more
hard liquor
so yeah hard liquor when
I was in school in Canada in the
eighties 95% of what we drank was beer
not there wasn't any whiskey or even or
tequila or vodka in our party such as
beer beer kegs take parties yeah
really hard to get blackout drunk on
beer I mean blackout to get the blackout
you've got to be here you gotta get to
like I forgot what the exact number of
10 drinks or something well it's point
you got to blow like 0.18 or something I
forgotten with is a sort of magic number
where people said for everybody because
some people they just get gerbil eyes
like there's some dudes they'll have a
couple of drinks and they get shark eyes
you know those those dark yeah like
expressionless eyes like hey man he's
still here
yeah they're just wandering around like
like a like a person with doll eyes
there's somethin there with these shoes
back that is just at what point does
your hippocampus shut down and you cease
to have the ability to make memories and
that's just that's a very narrow
clinical explanation of so there may be
a whole different set of manifestations
of drunkenness that have to do with it
alcohol's effect on other parts of your
brain right but blackout is just about
your hippocampus and past a certain
blood alcohol concentration your
hippocampus just goes offline
essentially you just pull the plug on it
and then so nothing that's coming in is
being stored Wow so you can continue to
communicate I could be blackout drunk
right now but does it vary with people
does it the number well so it would it
would vary depending I think on drinking
history and yeah but I mean is a there
is it's there's a kind of a there's a
consensus figure where most people I
wish I it's in my book I wish I could
remember I think it's something like
0.16 or something like that if you think
of the if the the love the level legal
level for drinking forums for driving is
0.08 I think it's roughly 2x that level
and most people at that level will be at
risk we'll have at least the beginnings
of memory impairment mm-hmm so that
feeling when you get really drunk at a
party and the next morning you can only
remember little bits and pieces of what
happened that
that's because your your hippocampus was
posed at your moment of peak
intoxication your hippocampus was
starting to shut down
it just wasn't taking it it's really
interesting too because some of our most
interesting minds and some of the best
communicators relied on alcohol heavily
Mike and it made that like Hitchens made
it made him a more interesting
communicator when he was drunk well he
would have a drink
you know I mean right like he would be
on Bill Maher you could tell he was lit
and and and he was so eloquent and so
articulate but that beautiful phrasing
so remember though that's this is an
interesting point and a crucial point
about blackout which is your hippocampus
doesn't necessarily control your your
how articulate you are or how fluid your
speeches it's just about memory so
Hitchens could have been the most
articulate person in the world and just
and but the next morning he would not
have remembered a single thing he said
on Bill Maher I mean I'm assuming if he
was blackout no but you don't know
there's fascinating stories in the
literature about when people were
discovering blackout in the 50s and they
would there would be these stories like
they would some guy would come in he
would wake up in Las Vegas and he would
say what am i doing in Las Vegas like I
think he would go and he would see his
clothes hanging in the closet
and he would say what what's going on
and then he would like go down to the
desk and say what and he said well you
checked in last night and he would look
in his wall and he would see he had a
plane ticket from Cleveland and they
would reconstruct and there's a in fact
this very story was told in the you know
one of the big sites medical journals in
the 50s the guy reconstructs he's a
Salesman
living in like st. Louis who gets really
really drunk and then his hippocampus
shuts down and he continues to function
so it goes gets in his car drives to the
airport buys a plane ticket goes to
Vegas
does he doesn't know it is in Vegas does
whatever he does in Vegas and then wakes
up like two days later oh my god
hippocampus is suddenly back online what
am i doing in Vegas that is two days two
days so what is like what is he you can
you you like that was my put I
would be blackout right now and still
communicate you wouldn't know it I don't
it's not like you can tell I can't tell
whether you have a headache can I write
no clue so you don't know what's going
you mean until we come up with that
machine that you were talking about you
can't tell that my hippocampus isn't
working except if you answer if you ask
me the same question this is how you the
only way you can do it you had a party
you think someone's blackout asked them
the same question over and over again
and see if they respond like say why you
asked me so literally I would say wait
did you say your uh your 1/4 Irish and
then I would just have to wait like say
five seconds and I say Joe did you see
her 1/4 Irish and in a certain way
you're gonna say Malcolm why to stop it
if you don't say that you're blackout
drunk but if you do if you could you be
blackout drunk and still have like a
tiny memory no you may just ask me that
okay so the hippocampus doesn't shut
down all at once so what it does is it
shuts down slowly so let's imagine we're
both doing shots so after I mean I'm
quite sure your capacity I'm I mean
you're like I'm half your wait am i but
I don't know what you are you're like
200 pounds I'm 126 ok so we're gonna
deal with alcohol very differently but
let's assume we're doing shots of
tequila there's a point of where things
start to get hazy so you might remember
that I asked you that question you might
not and then as we keep drinking in our
blood alcohol levels get higher and
higher at a certain point your
hippocampus will completely like the off
switch has been thrown so it goes from
being sluggish and impaired to just
being down like and what brings it back
well your blood-alcohol level has to
fall to the point where it can work
again so you fall asleep and over the
course of eight hours of sleep you know
your alcohol is processed by your liver
blood alcohol Falls hippocampus snaps
back into action
wow what a ridiculous drug to be our
most socially acceptable drug yeah
totally and then the Vegas thing where
they give it to
for free Christie in a place where you
can gamble which is really sneaky yeah
that's one of the weirder laws ever that
if a person could literally lose their
house while they're black out drunk
crazy I mean in retrospect imagine you
were were we let's do a little ranking
thing here we have three vices and I'm I
know exactly where you're gonna be going
with this but we have three things we
want to prioritize dope alcohol smoking
right cigarettes cigarettes you can ban
one Vashti rank them in order you could
start from scratch I'm saying Joe we're
starting over okay
what you say goes rank you weak so right
now the way we have dealt with these is
smoking is is becoming the most taboo of
those three cigarettes mm-hmm
marijuana ii and alcohol is the one that
we have the least inhibitions about
right my argument would be that that
list is exactly backwards that it should
be alcohol should be the most taboo
marijuana should be actually not exactly
backwards it should be alcohol the most
abou cigarettes the second most
marijuana the third that's how I would
do yeah I would agree with that yeah
yeah so we're basically we have it
completely upside down but I think for
some people like look there's obviously
obviously terrible things that happen to
you when you smoke cigarettes hmm but
every time is it Potsie I've smoked a
cigarette or two before shows like I've
smoked to see I mean I mean or two I've
never smoked two in a row but I've
smoked a cigarette before I've done
shows like Dave Chappelle gave me one of
his cigarettes recently Tony hinge clips
give me a cigarette I'm not a cigarette
smoker but there's something cool about
the head rush that you get when you
smoke a cigarette I hesitate to say that
and this is a person who's done a lot of
drugs I've done a lot I've smoked a lot
of pot and I've done psychedelics and
I'll talk about them openly I have
hesitation about telling people that
enjoyed a cigarette well because because
it's because I think it's so bad for you
it's it's it's I think when I talk about
doing mushrooms
I think mushrooms are good for you I
think it makes you freak out I think it
illuminates parts of your consciousness
that I think a lot of people guard and
protect and shield and I think sometimes
doing something that breaks down those
walls is good for you ultimately overall
there's a little bit of an adjustment
period but I think you learn something
about the normal state of consciousness
I don't think you learn much when you
smoke cigarettes I just think there's
just a little bit of a head rush that
you get out of it but I know so many
people that are sick from cigarettes so
many people that can't quit them so many
people that have died from cancer I mean
I personally have known several people
that have died from cancer from smoking
cigarettes yeah so I hesitate in saying
it but I don't want to be dishonest I've
had them yeah I don't smoke cigarettes
though I've never bought a pack I've
that's a cigar of smoke cigars I like um
sometimes I just think it's a terrible
it's a terrible thing to get hooked on
yeah yeah and as I would say the same
thing with alcohol I know people that
have had real problems with alcohol that
have been alcoholics and they have to go
to meetings and you know they're on
12-step programs and you know I would
never offer them a drink mm-hmm but if
you said hey let's do a shot right now
let's celebrate we this is a wonderful
conversation let's have a glass of
whiskey I can have a glass of whiskey
and not drink again it doesn't bother me
okay I don't I don't have that whatever
that is yeah but some people do yeah I
hesitate hesitating glorifying that -
yeah and for young people it scares the
shit out of me if I see I probably drank
for the first time when I was probably I
was in high school I think is probably
14 or 15 the first time I ever got drunk
with my friends you know we got ahold of
some Jack Daniels or something and made
me throw us the Irish drinking age yes
well it was just friends you know listen
in the classic rock and getting drunk in
fosston but the it's it's something I
occasionally enjoy I think I enjoy
alcohol I
like having a drink of wine with a glass
of wine with a meal I like having a
drink with friends occasionally but I
don't have a problem with it and I know
people who do and so I feel weird
talking about it knowing those people
that do have a problem with it yeah yeah
with pot though the people that have a
problem with pot it's rare and it's
usually people that have some sort of
and I do believe there there is an issue
with people have some sort of an
underlying schizophrenic issue that
could come from especially high doses if
they smoke a lot of pot in one night
they can have a schizophrenic episode
I've actually seen it particularly from
edibles I've seen it but that's to me
that's absolutely the least taboo and I
think there's a lot of benefits to pot I
think pot makes you more sociable I
think it makes you friendlier mm-hmm I
mean some people get paranoid from it
but I think that's what that really is
is marijuana illuminating how vulnerable
you actually are yeah you know that we
sort of protect ourselves from this
overwhelming existential angst that you
get when you get high on pot yeah and
people say oh I don't like it it makes
me paranoid well you know the reality is
you're vulnerable we're all very very
very vulnerable and we just somehow
another make it to like how old are you
I'm 52 we made it we made this age
somehow or another despite all the
paranoia we don't have to I mean it's
really you know life is crazy we're in
these metal boxes with combustion
engines
you know like trusting the people next
to us going 60 miles an hour or paying
attention not looking at their phone you
know it's like it's very left in them we
get in planes and wells the fuck's going
on with the engine this guy's flying it
over the sky it's we're very vulnerable
all the time just diseases and you know
not to mention you know war and all
sorts of other things that could float
we're like yeah I mention everything
earthquake fire yeah yeah fires yes no
my my thing on this is simply the
collateral damage
yeah so leave the individual out of it
and ask how much social damage is caused
by any of those things
Oh
in alcohol and ass number one just by a
fire by a bullet yeah yeah you know
what's amazing to me is how the people
who make alcohol have get a free ride
it's incredible to me like if I said to
you that I was on the board of Philip
Morris you would say that's Malcolm
that's pretty screwed up yeah and you
would you would be you know a problem
with it if I said that oh I'm you know
I'm on the board of anheuser-busch you
probably would hit me up for tickets to
the Super Bowl
mmm right is that the same whereas
there's no in terms of the amount of
social damage what al caught
anheuser-busch has created has produced
a hundred times the social damage than
what Philip Morris has produced Yeah
right like or you know so it's like it's
a it's always puzzled about I don't know
how he got it in our heads like to treat
one like it's completely taboo and the
other we kind of shrug you know the
there are bunch I was reading about this
recently how many colleges except not
just accept alcohol advertising and
sponsorship but you go to a college
football game and you know Bud Light
will have will be an active sponsor of
the event we'll have some huge
relationship with the school this is
crazy
we it's crazy right it's like this is
the drug that is causing so many
problems for young people particularly
on campuses and the schools are hand in
glove with the manufacturers of it
because it's socially acceptable because
they don't have to worry about
repercussions because we gave it up we
give it in a way that they would never
have Marlboro Marlboro yeah oh my god
people would pick it yeah
where is it's not you know I don't know
that's true it's a strange kind of we're
so messy people are so messy and that is
that's a very good example of how messy
we are the UM I'm now I'm I hidden real
efficient means I hadn't realized you
were from Boston why are so many comics
from Boston it's a hard place is that
what it mean women drunk guys
first of all am i right am i right in
thinking there does seem to be like why
is it every time I turn around and I've
listened to some comic and they say well
when I was growing up in Boston of
course a lot it's a lot there's a lot
and there are a specific kind of it's
like the audience is there have a very
short attention span they they're
they're not gonna coddle you if you suck
they will boo you off the stage it's
terrible for your self-esteem when
you're young yeah but it but it's it
doesn't just build character it builds
the correct approach towards an audience
that you have to realize these people do
not let these people got babysitters
they they spent money they're here they
could have been in the movie they could
have done a lot of the recreational
activities they've chosen to come to the
comedy club stop fucking around get to
work
like like treat this like this is and
the consequences of bombing are horrific
right the feeling is - it's one of the
worst feelings a person can have yeah so
when was the last time you bombed it's
been a while since I bomb bombed but
I've had jokes that ate shit
yeah well that's this is there's a
process that i go through every two
years i put out special and then i write
a new one and during the process of
writing a new one you don't write it in
a vacuum you write it and then i bring
that stuff to the comedy store and
fortunately with the Comedy Store you're
doing 15-minute sets with you know 15
other talented people and so you you
don't have to be up there for a long
time and you get it in the comp the the
Comedy Store also the audience is very
unique in that a lot of them understand
that they're going to see these guys
like Dave Chappelle and Chris Rock and
work out comedy hoist they know it's
they understand it and like you could
joke around about it like that bit sucks
I swear to god that's gonna be good in
about four months tip puts that bits in
the oven right now because there's
concepts that you have there you go
there's got to be a way to make this
work but that way that I just did is not
the way I will always trust the reaction
you get in other words you don't tell a
joke it bombs and you say actually I
think it was their problem not mine ever
that's never their problem there's not a
chance in hell you can have a bad
audience where a good joke doesn't go
over because they're drunk and they're
not paying attention to their heckling
that's possible yeah but that's the
anomaly
the its if you have a bit and you think
it's a great bin the audience doesn't
laugh they're right mm-hmm you know
maybe another audience would laugh maybe
you're doing it in the wrong demographic
or what-have-you but most likely that
joke sucks yeah and most likely you have
these ideas and you need to figure out
how to rework them like Chris Rock told
me that that he says that famous bit
that I love black people I hate the
n-word right that bit he said took him a
year to work out a full year he said it
was bombing he couldn't get it to work
right
he'll fuck up his act but he knew there
was a way to do it and then it became
one of the greatest bits of all time it
became this incredible classic bit but
that was from him grinding just chipping
away at it reworking it bringing it
onstage it eats shit you bring it back
you go over it you ponder it you ask
questions of other great writers like
what do you think you know No maybe then
and then you try it again and it keeps
doing it he does does it a hundred times
or 200 times and then eventually it
becomes a bullet proof and then he gets
it down to that form that you see it on
his comedy special where it's just boom
punchline BAM punchline boom punchline
BAM and people like because it's so good
but there's a process to doing that and
sometimes you have this idea in your
head and you're like I think there's
something there
I just got to figure out how to get into
their head yeah and then I got to figure
out how to make it in a way what's the
most palatable way for people to digest
this idea because comedy is essentially
a mass hypnosis right you're getting the
audience to allow you to think for them
for a brief period of time and so if
you're at your best
the punchlines are sneaky they come
where you don't expect them you take
people on this ride they're assuming
because they're letting you think for
them that you're a thoughtful person
you're not gonna make them feel bad for
liking you and that's one of things that
people really hate you say something
mean or something thoughtless you
portray yeah you betrayed their trust
because they've trusted you to think for
them yeah so you have to be considerate
about people's sensibilities and
feelings you know and when you're
especially when you're breaching a
sensitive issue like it you have to you
have to dance you have to do you have to
figure out a way to make this thing
compatible into people's thought
patterns it's funny I you know I don't
I'm not a stand-up comedian but I gave a
lot of speeches like in in conferences
and corporate settings which is a very
in some ways a very different animal in
some ways quite a similar animal I've
been doing it for 20 odd years now and
the thing I'm always that blows me away
is how different audiences are hmm like
and I one thing that you after doing it
for about 10 years you start to get a
little bit smarter about reading the
room at the beginning to know who they
are and what and it's you know it makes
a difference like there are some some
audiences are generous and they'll if
they see the in my case the punchline is
not necessarily a joke but it's the the
payoff to whatever story I'm telling
some people when they see it coming if
you think about it as a line mm-hmm
they'll reward you the minute they see
it they see it off in the horizon yeah
oh it's coming and they encourage you
yes some people will wait until the last
possible moment and then some people
will wait a beat after the punchline is
over and then think about it and reward
you those three audiences may that makes
a world of difference in how you tell
the story in your expectation going in
in you know because if you if you think
it's an early rewarding audience and
it's a late rewarding audience you can
get you'd be ten minutes in and you're
totally bummed out because you think
it's a disaster but in fact it's not
like and then you get I develop all of
these short hands about audiences I
don't know if they're true or not but in
my experience I remember once giving a
talk to a group of engineers on a early
on a Monday morning in Minneapolis in
February so it's freezing it's 8 o'clock
in the morning they're engineers and
they're all white guys they're like
regions right an incredibly thoughtful
interesting audience listen to every
word but they are not gonna reward you
until they have thought about what you
said and they'll wait like you know
there's a five-second lag between
whatever payoff you give and their
response right if you go I've also given
a talk to like a group of teachers in
New Orleans so there you have a room
that is largely female that will be much
more diverse so maybe 50% black for
example 20 percent Hispanic 30% white
just way more they're gonna reward you
the minute they see it coming their
teachers first of all so their whole
thing is about listening rewarding you
know seeing the best in something and
celebrating it yeah I mean completely
different and if you go into the
engineers in Minneapolis and the
teachers in New Orleans with the same
expectation you're gonna it's going to
be a disaster
yeah right yeah teachers just want to
find a way to love you right and and
also they're women women I think my
experience are far more generous than
men as audience I don't know overall
yeah probably
yeah but uh so that like I'm I took a
long time to figure that out because you
for the longest time I would walk away
from someone I would think from some
talks and would think I just did
committed the worst possible offenses
you're doing a different thing though
it's your dance is very different right
you're first of all you're giving these
speeches and you're doing it in these
corporate environments you're doing it
in conference rooms I would imagine and
a different kind of halls and yeah
bright lights yeah I'm doing it at
comedy clubs theaters and arenas so
comedy clubs they know what they're
getting into they're in and it's set up
like if you go to the Comedy Store or
The Improv right it's a low ceiling it's
a great hot mic is great sound system
there's opening acts that warm everybody
up before I get there the stage is set
and it's a an environment that it's been
established for decades this is a place
to go to hear people tell jokes
yeah you're doing it you'd say you don't
have an opening acts you're doing it
they don't even know if you're gonna be
funny they don't know what you're gonna
do you're gonna talk yeah you're gonna
talk about that I've been sitting in the
same air-conditioned arena for six hours
one small break I mean it's there and
listening to really doing work yes you
know so it's a yeah it is it very very
different yeah it's a super interesting
I find it route it incredibly rewarding
and I also find it it's sort of it
reaffirms my my my kind of faith in
humanity for some reason interesting I
really I'm very very happy that I
started doing it so doing it years and
years ago but just to communicate with
large groups of people that reaffirms
her faith in what way because I'm always
struck by how open I I think a lot of
the rhetoric in our society now about
how divided we are and blood I just
think it's I think we're divided on line
I think we talked to people person to
person yeah we find a way to find common
ground yeah and you go to these meetings
and you know that half of the room voted
one way another half voted the other way
and that it doesn't come up it doesn't
block half of you from appreciating have
them appreciating what you're saying
they're totally open to to as long as
you are respectful and take the time to
explain what you think and why and what
and how it matters to them then people
will listen and engage and ask really
good questions and I don't see so funny
that Washington is divided and online is
divided I don't I just don't see it else
mm maybe I'm not getting an accurate
picture of the whole country but in in
these you know give a talk a group of
whatever educators in New Orleans you
don't see this I think when it comes to
political discussions that's when people
get really divided because I think they
feel like they're supposed to be divided
it was really interesting video that I
watched yesterday where Donald Trump jr.
was getting heckled by these alt-right
characters for not being right-wing
enough I was like holy shit like this
this but I took it a lot of pleasure and
watching that play out not because I
want Donald Jr to
heckled but because I this is what I've
always said there's people that are just
extreme and it doesn't matter if they're
in an tyfa or if they're in the proud
boys if they're far left or far right
it's the same thing they're just finding
an ideology and they're taking it to the
extremist level and they're angry that
people weren't woke enough or they're
finding an ideology and they take it to
the furthest level and they're angry
people that are not separatists that
aren't white supremacist they're angry
people that like Mexicans at all than
any Mexicans I mean there's there's
people that are that racist that are mad
at subtle racism they're mad at people
that there's just people that are
extreme and you can't make everyone
happy
it is impossible and some people don't
want to be happy they want to find ways
in which you're not woke enough they're
their concern is not the overwhelming
good of the world harmony peace love
compatibility communication and
community that's not where their concern
is their concern is finding ways you're
wrong so finding ways that they're right
and ways that you're that you're wrong
so they'll they'll find some reason why
you're not woke enough and so it my
response to that was a was slightly
different although I think a lot of what
you're saying is accurate the reason
they got upset with him was that he
wouldn't do a QA yes okay yes okay
now as someone who's on his book tour
and has done been doing this for 20
years let me just say you have to do the
Q&A yeah the Q&A is symbolically crucial
it's like everyone says okay I would
seize you get up there and you do your
prepared bit and it was like okay fine I
know you can do your prepared bit but
you're asking me to spend $28 on a book
and on what I want to know is are you
someone who is meaningfully engaged in
the ideas that you're talking about in
your book right so Q&A is where you
prove that to me yes
prove that you're thoughtful prove you
care about the stuff prove that you
wrote this and someone else didn't prove
all those things he wouldn't do it
I'm sorry find it weird because he just
did the view which is like the worst way
to have a Q&A I had fun of you
but I'm saying and that's a choice
there's everyone's talking everybody
over everybody yeah you you really don't
get a chance to express full thoughts
yes yeah if he if he could do the view
he can certainly do QA at you it was at
UCLA was it was it really was it but
what was interesting too is that what he
was using as an excuse was that the the
left-wing media is going to take his
quotes and take him out of context dude
I've no sympathy for him well in that
case no didn't make any sense doesn't
make any sense like any sense just say
something intelligent an eyeful and
you'll be taken seriously that's the way
the rule works well there's a whole
video I mean if someone takes it out of
context you could always like show the
entire video hey that's out of context
why is he playing the helpless credit
stopper this Tainted well I mean is
someone who's in you know like I said
look I got no sympathy for that either
listen I have no sympathy for him either
in that in this case I do not I think
it's it's not I found it very amusing
his wife or a girlfriend forgotten what
she is which of those things she is she
she then this is the crowd about how the
only the only way they could get dates
is online because nobody would do you
see that it's like rule number two after
rule number one is do the QA rule number
two is don't dis the audience by by
telling them they're all losers like
it's just not what do you well there's
people you know that's a thing where
people want to just get get you you got
them so they want to get you people are
booing fuck you you lose no no no you're
a loser
you know it's just noises instead of gum
love love yeah you have a good one guys
take care
but instead you're right do the Q&A
yeah don't don't don't even you know
it's not that hard to answer questions I
think there's a real problem with
answering questions in front of a crowd
though where people screaming out things
I think real thoughtful conversation
should be had one-on-one and it's it
what if like we you and I are having
this conversation it's great but if
there was a third person there talking
to we would have to work that guy in or
that girl in we'd have to figure out
when she's talking when we're talking
and if you got another person okay now
you've got a real problem now you have
four people and yeah it's it's very
difficult if you watch those panel shows
some for some reason the network news
shows post election pre-election their
election cover they still haven't
figured that out they'll get seven
people on they think it's like more than
merrier I mean like the like the pregame
shows on NFL yeah like they got so many
guys each one of them says one set yes
and they're talking over each other and
everybody's trying to get a sound bite
off everyone has this prepared thing
this is zinger I'm gonna get that Trump
guy with this one and they're ready for
it and they're trying to interject it
and someone's talking over them and
excuse me I'm talking and then it
degrades wait I want to use the
opportunity of being on the show to
issue a challenge to don't a jump junior
Oh like just call me up dawn and I will
accompany you on your book tour an
interview on you on stage respectfully
will do let's let's do a Q&A you and me
we'll ask you questions I'll do it
do you want to do that yes that's
something you want to do why do you want
to do that I think I'll be fun
what do you think would be fun about it
well I think it would be without saying
anything that's gonna net him to not do
it okay
so let's be clear about a couple things
okay this not it would not be a stunt
I'm not doing it to do gotcha I would
like to read his book thoughtfully and
engage with him in the ideas in it and
do we see for myself
exactly thing I was talking about before
is is he does he want to meaningfully
engage with those ideas with someone who
doesn't necessarily share them right
right and that would be for its I would
ask for an hour
mm-hm and we can do it in lieu of
audience Q&A if he likes I will just
have a conversation with Wednesday so
just a conversation in front of an
audience
Oh mmm that would be interesting I mean
you see that would you pay to see that
yeah I would do his book title is the
same as my 2016 Netflix title it's
triggered I got there first oh don't be
cheers that's question number one I'll
say done I noticed it time of your book
is the same as why are you biting Joe
Rogan stuff what's going on over there
he probably didn't know it existed bill
almost released his HBO specials
triggered - really yeah I was gonna call
it trigger - but at least he sent me an
email apologizing you know I'm gonna get
it you want to get there early well it's
you know it's not my term I wouldn't
really care if bill used it or if Donald
Trump jr. used it he did obviously is he
doesn't hurt dawn he's done he'll come
dawn uh that's a good question isn't he
Donald Trump jr. on line but they think
they distinguish the dad is Donald oh so
they call him I don't know that's one of
things that could happen
presumably in our face off maybe we
should do why am i limiting it to an
hour oh yeah
let's go Rogen rule let's go like two
hours yes me and Don G right in the
second hour we really get into it yeah
because that's what happens you could
keep it together people can keep it
together for 45 minutes you can't keep
it together for three hours in three
hours you know who a person is you know
I couldn't give a talk in Colombia and
the Colombians are take themselves in
the best way very seriously right they
consider themselves the most cultured
people do that America yeah and there
and there they think they speak the most
beautiful Spanish and I'm told they they
may as well they may well do and so I
was talking with the was gonna go this
little kind of lecture tour of major
Colombian cities and I was talking to
the organizer and I extend a question
you asked is well how long I should talk
for some period of time and then we'll
do Q&A how long do you think I should
talk and the guy goes I don't know house
three hours he was dead serious and you
realize like this is the same soap when
Fidel Castro would give those six hour
speeches you realize it's not just I
mean Castro a little bit crazy but
there's also the art puck there are
cultures that have an expectation but if
you're gonna go and hear somebody speak
it's not going to be over in 40 minutes
right you have to commit to the to the
experience and they literally wanted me
to start at nine and end it noon weren't
the early campaign speeches for people
running for president and the early days
this country weren't they like that as
well I believe there were long affairs
yeah and then
you get the Gettysburg Address which is
what is it six minutes or something hmm
oh no no or is it the inaugural I
forgotten one of Lincoln's most famous
speeches very brief is incredibly brief
and you realize in now context where
people are used to hours and hours and
hours what an extraordinary I mean it is
think about Lincoln as a kind of badass
entertainer not entertainer performer
mmm-hmm so he walks into a world where
everyone's thinking they're gonna be
there for two hours he sits up there and
he's done in five minutes mmm he was
what up just a Power Move that is its
elastic like it is a good move
imagine him so he comes in to his like
aides and says this holds it up and it's
you know you've seen in the in the
Lincoln monument on the mall it's two
paragraphs ya know Ford what is it I'm
not Canadian four score years ago
yes blah blah blah blah two paragraphs
on they must have been like what these
people traveled by horse and cart for
hours near you speak yeah right yeah
that's it such a great move it is a good
move right we're still talking about it
today yeah it's unbelievably beautiful I
every time I go to the Lincoln monument
and read that I am moved to tears it is
insanely gorgeous prose as a writer you
must appreciate like economy of words
using the right words in the right place
and having the the right impact and you
know my friend Ari he has a piece of
paper that he has glued to the top of
his laptop from Hemingway to quotes as
the first draft of everything is shit
it's true and there's something about
someone nailing writing someone just
writing something that you go god damn
you just fucking nail that yeah yeah
there you have to mean the trick is
always even though it's false you have
to you have to hold in your heart the
conviction that there is a way to say
this perfectly and beautifully yeah
right you you so even when you're in
draft 1 or 2 or 5 and it's not there yet
you have to believe it's possible and
the minute you lose that
that it's possible it's over when you
when you write do you write on paper
first and then start typing like how do
you how do you type oh and then print it
out because there's there's certain
things structural things you can only
see I think when it's on the page and
you've kind of put all the pages in
front printed out though you don't write
longhand at all dude I'll print it out
and then we'll I would know then it will
annotate that draft with a pen mm so I
will do longhand absolutely there's a
there there's a I I'm very I think that
our thinking is actually quite sensitive
to the the mode that we're using yes so
you think differently when you're typing
on a keyboard than when you have a pen
in your hand and I think it's neither
not one is better than the other they're
both good they're just different and yes
makes sense to use both yeah I agree
it's particularly for me my notes before
I go onstage I always write out longhand
I mean right out I write my comedy
though all my thoughts essays I write
them all out on a keyboard
I'd write typing and then when I'm about
to go onstage like the hour or so before
a show I'll write out index cards and
sometimes I'll write out entire bits if
it's a bit I'm working on and it's kind
of new I'll write it all out and it
helps tremendously with my memory yeah
but something about writing things out
but writing to me on paper is so slow
it's so slow for me to actually write
the words for me to get the thoughts out
I want to get the thoughts out with a
keyboard because I can just type I can
do it quickly I can get it done what I
don't do what a lot of people do do is
voice to text I don't do that never done
that no but we I have a question that
occur to me when you saying you were
talking about that schedule that you're
on that you do us every two years yeah
so are you starting when you when you
have to sit down and write new material
are you starting cold or do you have in
in the previous year were you kind of
building up little bits and pieces that
you're now putting together yeah I
always have little stuff that I lay
aside like I have I have
pages and pages of shit that never went
anywhere and so I'll go back over that
and go man this maybe doesn't take that
out there and then I'll introduce all so
usually there's a window of time like
say if I'm I film it in July
it might not air until are or into
October rather so in that window I have
those four months to try to create
material so what I'll be able to do in
that window say I have a bit that I know
works because it's something special
I'll do that bit because the people
haven't seen it yet and then after that
bit I will sandwich in and some new
stuff and I'll try to make that new
stuff come alive and then I'll add a bit
after that that I know is good then I'll
sandwich and some new soap you can make
like a like a club sandwich of shitty
jokes it's sandwiched in between like
legit bits and then one of them will
catch fire no Mike all right this one's
alive now good and you go back can you
see a trajectory in your comedy like
when you go back and look at something
you wish you were a joke that you may
have done I don't know eight years ago
do you how do you react to it does it I
don't work I don't but if I did I
probably somewhat I would I would
definitely see flaws oh my god that's
too wordy or that's that's clunky or
that's fit for store I don't like how I
acted that out or I don't like maybe
that wasn't done yet you know there's a
there's a cooking period and everybody
has a different take on it I've been my
friend Anthony Jeselnik has a three year
cycle and he might be right he he takes
the first year he just does clubs in LA
and develops material the second year he
goes on the road and he goes to comedy
clubs in the row the third year he takes
at the theaters and then he's ready to
film at the end of the third year yeah
and you know his last special was
excellent but he's just a very good
comic very good writer but his process
might be right there's some guys that
were doing it on a one year cycle they
were doing a new special every year and
I don't think that's right that's gotta
be yeah it's too hard it's not just too
hard the material suffers it's
half-cooked a lot of is gooey on the
inside it's just not ready
it's not done me some of the bits are
really good then some of its aren't and
you have to fill the whole hour and the
problem is also when you're doing a
special every year you have your own
audience so those people love you so
they're laughing at stuff that's not
even that good like you have to you have
to be doing that in front of a bunch of
people that didn't expect to see you
yeah yeah yeah that's that's hard to do
so a lot a lot of weird tricks you could
play on yourself as a comic you know you
could think you're better than you are
or that the bits are better than they
are or that you you don't have to worry
about things anymore you don't have to
grind you don't have to throw yourself
into the gladiator pit that is the
Comedy Store on a Tuesday night but you
do you do there's no other way if you
want to be top notch you have to do the
things that top-notch people do there's
a sinister mean there's no there's no
books written on this there's no
university course but all the best
people will tell you there's a process
this is the process yeah it's one of the
weird art forms and that no one teaches
it there's literally anybody who does
teach it is terrible there's no one who
can it is I've never seen like a we're a
real world-class headliner sells out
theaters who teaches a course on comedy
never seen it mm-hmm you know and I
couldn't teach you how to do it anyway
because your way of doing it would be
very different than Jamie's way of doing
it which be very different than Steven
right which is very different than Sam
Kinison it's like everybody's got their
own weird little thing that makes them
funny it's a matter of what is you the
process mmm how do you how do you get it
out who is your candidate for I always
love in any particular field
there's the insiders choice and then
there's the popular choice like the most
hilarious one is if you ask an architect
who their favorite architect is 99 times
out of a hundred you will never have
heard that art it's always some obscure
German guy from like hmm the thirty you
know or it's some like you know
experimental Dutch guy who did he's done
one building and it's like amazing if
you know it's like some you did a church
outside of Antwerp and it was it blew
everyone's mind why was that so who's
that who's who's your insiders I would
say the insider a pick is Dave Attell
because Dave Attell is probably one of
the greatest comics of all time and
doesn't get enough love because he has
no social media presence he wears the
same hat and the same shirt and the same
jacket in the same pants every day he
does no thought whatsoever about his
look all he does is just write new and
better jokes constantly he's one of the
most prolific comics but he still he'll
still have a hard time selling places
out and it doesn't make any sense
although lately he and Jeff Ross have
done this thing called bumping mics
where they go on stage and they sort of
work together and they talk shit and
like Jeff will say something funny and
then Dave will say something funny and
Dave will do his bits and Jeff will make
fun of them and they'll go it's really
entertaining and they do a series of
shows doing that and that has elevated
his profile and that I'm very very thing
how long was he serve in the wilderness
he's been out there forever he's that
was show on Comedy Central way back in
the day called who was a hominid act yet
insomnia thank you
yeah and it was like he would go out
after shows and they would you know go
do weird things in these towns and he
would get blackout drunk and he was an
alcoholic at the time and he was getting
hammered drunk and then he quit he got
sober and rare in comedy that someone
gets sober and becomes much better but
that's what happened with Dave he's a
much better comic now than even was then
and what so and what's your when you see
someone like that perform and you're you
know someone who's extraordinary
talented and good what is your emotional
reaction to it do you run home and
re-examine all the stuff you're doing I
mean what's it was certainly inspiring
yeah when someone's really good I always
want to write that that is the feeling I
always a Cocker go to work work but also
I've cherished and held on to like a
like a sacred ember that I'm trying to
keep keep alive my fan oh my my my
my love of being a fan of stand-up
comedy like I like watching it I'm a fan
I love it a guy I like going to see it
like to this day like I'm working with
my friend Joey Diaz tonight who I think
is the funniest guy alive I'm happy I'm
gonna go see comedy I'm gonna see him
like that I'd still like watching I
still enjoy it I didn't for a while in
the early days it was too I was too
ambitious and I was judging myself
versus them and if someone had a really
great joke I wish I thought of it
instead of enjoying it
I'll go God why didn't I think of that
and that's a it's poison and then I
realized luckily well I got very lucky
that I figured this out early on like
you know couple two or three years and I
was like I used to love comedy like why
am I not loving comedy because I'm doing
calm that's the dumbest fucking thing in
the world the reason why I got into
stand-up comedy is because I loved
watching it now all of a sudden I don't
like it because I'm jealous or you know
I or it makes me compare myself to them
and I don't like the feeling or it makes
me you know what is that that's so dumb
and then I realized it thankfully and I
had a shift and I caught myself yeah and
I have managed to cherish and and
nurture that being a fan that feeling of
being an actual fan the enjoyment of
stand-up comedy I nature that so that
that to me is critical so when a guy
like David tells on stage I can enjoy it
I enjoy it I just can I can sit there
like an audience member and just laugh
but are you and the next question is
when you sit in an audience of cefotetan
you're singing ads with watching Dave
Attell okay are you experiencing him
differently than the audience is because
you were professional like him I'm sure
somewhat but I try to shut down the
analysis part of my brain as much as
possible I try to shut down like why did
he run out like that why doesn't he do
it this way I try to just be a fan I try
to just watch em you know but I'm sure I
know some things are coming or I know
the way I would do it or I know Dave
very well so I know how he would do it
I'm sure there's some sort of a
difference between but that's like the
same as immediate musician right if
you're a musician if you're a guitarist
and you're watching an amazing guitarist
even though they're really good you
probably like hmm okay I see what he's
doing he's doing this thing like you
understand technically I can't turn I
was my worry as I get older is that
increasingly my reactions are
simply versions of I would have done it
that's not how I would have done it
right right as opposed to
so if say punk comes to me for advice
my first did I think about oh that's
here's the advice I'd like to give on
this piece of writing my first someone
actually was talking a friend of mine
yesterday brought to me an essay she's
working on credibly interesting essay
about the role of women in cinema and I
give out so we're walking around and I'm
telling her my response to it and after
I give it that my first thought was wait
did I just say if I was doing it I was I
would have done it this way in other
words did I you know did I just simply
impose my own standards and preferences
on her which is not advice that's
actually the that's the worst thing what
you have to do is inhabit her mind and
fix it according to her own intentions
and yes I'll and I I my I'm constantly
paranoid about the notion that I am NOT
being truly empathetic at the moment of
giving advice I'm just projecting my own
and I think that's that's something that
happens when you get so when you become
so sure of your own methods and
professional personality
you know that's the kind of I wouldn't
have done that when I was 25 because I
didn't know what it meant to be to write
a Malcolm Gladwell thing where I was
just kind of reacting as a human being
but now I kind of have this thing burned
into my skull yeah you have a method I
have a method I mean I try to mix it up
but he probably still overhead and
everybody's method is dead particular
with writing right everybody's method
it's very different yeah everybody's
voice is very different there's some key
things with comedy one of them is as I
said before the economy of words it's
very important in comedy if you see the
punchline coming too far out it loses
impact with the more words you use but
if you can get the punchline to the
people before they see the punchline
coming in as a gigantic impact that's
what my friend Joey Diaz does better
than anybody mm-hmm he he does he does
it better than anybody he sneaks things
in on you yeah yeah this room I speak
along these very lines I've often
thought this was the one of the greatest
jokes
I'd like to see you probably know this
joke a lot in terms of economy this is
the most economical great joke I've ever
heard my life and it's from oh my god
his name this is appalling I forgotten
his name but I know I was Dillard Park
he was he was in a Lake Bell movie Lake
Bell yeah
he's an incredibly he had his own show
on it'll come to me the joke was you
know those signs in bathrooms in
restaurants you know all staff should
wash their hands after using the
bathroom right
especially Earl it's two words that
transform is a tricky to race
no no it's especially Earl especially so
it's like I cannot go into about them
anymore without thinking of that joke
it's so fantastic it's like you know you
did like it takes this you know I don't
need to explain the joke too it's just a
mate two words have created this lasting
image of Earl its averted the whole
bathroom thing it's it's I can't go to
the bathroom in your head it's burned
into my head oh is it Jamie its I cannot
believe that's so humiliating I can't
remember his name it was in New York
kind of indie comic okay but I just like
that bro girl I know but we're getting
close even close
you know it'll come to me but he um but
that's like I'm sure I am amazed by the
two words part mm-hmm like it's just
that you can do it with two words just
strikes me is the same reason why I'm
obsessed I've always had an incredible
love of television commercials for silly
yes because the good ones the idea that
you can communicate something
emotionally powerful or funny or
meaningful in 30 seconds is so badass
like 30 seconds is nothing
right and there are people whose job it
is to communicate and some of the like
not the run-of-the-mill like 80% of them
are relatively straightforward they
don't but there are there's a handful
that are just magnificent
there was one uh I mean there's a
million examples of great ones but there
was one really beautiful one which was a
Heineken ad I've got no I've forgotten
again the song they used we're a bunch
of kids jump in the back of a cab and
they start singing a bell dev DeVoe song
and the cab driver they're all young
cool hipsters they're all crammed in the
back and they're all like a little bit
tipsy and the cab drivers it's like
crusty old school guy and it comes to
the chorus and he chimes in and it's
just this moment it's 30 seconds and
it's fantastic cuz you don't you're not
expecting that you're thinking right you
see that crusty old it's like a Boston
cab driver right like some grizzled
Irish guy who's like 70 years old and
this we get you think oh you must hate
these kids because they're young and
beautiful and they're tipsy that's a
Friday night and he's driving a cab and
then the song comes on the radio and
they all start singing along and they're
kind of drunken way and then he just
joins in and is right it's right there
with it's fantastic and it's 30 seconds
like somebody a really great and funny
like that remember the Wendy's lady
where's the beef
oh yeah you'll never forget that one
three words where is the beef and an
image old lady screaming open it up a
cheeseburger looking for the beef yes
yes I mean how could you not how can you
not take off your hat the person who
came up with that yeah right if I gave
you if you're if you're sat was thirty
seconds it's all right yeah right and
you have to make a point you're trying
to sell something yeah
Jerry Seinfeld was going to open up an
advertising agency for a while he he had
thoughts about I know he had done a
couple of commercials and apparently he
had written some of the commercials and
he had decided that he was gonna write
commercials yeah he was gonna do that I
think he's got so much Seinfeld money
he's like fuck that why am i working
my doing I've got a billion dollars in
the bag I just go buy a couple more
Porsche
I mean his his he doesn't just have a
billion dollars in the bank his more
coming in coming in yeah it's like
constantly coming in yeah there's no
it's like a yeah it just seems to agree
to does he did he get did this Larry
David had the same deal that he does I
do not know
yeah I would love to know that I would
like to know that too I don't think he
does I know I would imagine he doesn't
but I think he's probably extremely
wealthy but he has in my opinion the
most underrated sitcom of all time and
Curb Your Enthusiasm there's times that
I've watched that show where I've been
literally weeping laughing like holding
my side laughing yeah and it's so odd
the way he does it you know do you know
how he writes things yeah they have like
a place where they like okay you're
trying to sell me a toaster and Jamie's
trying to stop me from buying that
toaster but you're you're mad at Jamie
and you're trying to be persuasive at me
at the same time that's how they write
so it's they just do multiple takes with
really talented people and they find
magic yeah it's correct meaning it's
crazy how open-ended it I've talked to
different guys that have been on the
show yeah you know about how they do it
it's it's amazing yeah that you have to
love the the amount of trust you have to
have in your fellow actors yes yeah but
it's kind of that's lovely yes
particularly contrasted with this
incredibly tightly controlled email
writing process right that's in place in
so many of those shows yes yes yes but
it's also why that show seems so organic
yeah you know I mean there's talking
over it sounds real it's like you know I
had trouble watching it because it was
too real to me
I was just cringing with all of the
social awkwardness just constructing one
socially awkward situation of yours
right and I couldn't because I couldn't
distinguish it from real life yes I just
I just very much it was good about it
did you ever see the one where he has
he's over the rapper's house
krazee-eyez-killa you see though the
rapper has Scarface plated 24/7 I mean
it's Larry David with this rapper it is
fucking Magic Man it's magic it's so
good
yes yeah oh he's a legitimate genius
there's no doubt about that and you know
he's also like a real legit oddball like
he drives a Prius you know like he is
that schlubby guy is probably worth 500
million dollars or something crazy but
you know he's that kind of schlubby guy
that's the way he me that's who he is
yeah those guys were in am i right they
were in New York like barely scraping by
forever yeah yeah well he was a stand-up
and he and Jerry knew each other from
back then and you know he was a weird
stand-up like it just was an acquired
taste it wasn't it wasn't you know it
wasn't yeah burning down comedy clubs
who which comics are not to your taste
I'm not saying that you don't like I
mean that are not to your taste that is
whose humor just doesn't kind of know
you mean nothing I could think of
offhand I don't I wouldn't pay attention
one things I've gotten really good at as
I've gotten older is not paying any
attention to things I don't like yeah
just just letting it just slide right
out of my brain and onto the floor I'm
not interested it's just I I spent so
much time when I was younger and stupid
or worrying about things I don't like
being upset if things I don't like well
that sucks why do people like that what
the fuck's wrong with them and then
realize like what a gigantic waste of
resources that is just a huge waste of
energy yeah that uh I don't care anymore
you know as long as they're not stealing
material as long as they're not you know
doing something terrible to other comics
victimizing as long as they're not doing
that I really don't care it's like
they're doing well good luck is in yeah
I tried you mean it's not I'm just not I
mean it's not a hundred percent it's
it's constantly a work of process but my
philosophy is rooted in some sort of a
pragmatic understanding of how my own
brain works yeah like you don't you only
have so much time and you only have so
much energy and if you're wasting your
time on things that you don't like that
have nothing to do with you if people
like something like that's how I feel
about music and and movies and so many
things there's so many things that are I
just
like them at all but some people do I
mean you know some people will that I
think their music is dogshit
but they'll have full Staples Center if
people are rocking out well I must be
wrong it's not me it's not them it's
just like everyone's different people
have different tastes
some people like really cheesy rom-coms
and they like it they really enjoy it
they seek comfort in this movie where
you know it's gonna work out in the end
it's going to it's not like in the end
the fucking meteors gonna land on the
building and kill everybody and the the
screen is gonna splatter with blood
because you know their bodies explode
you're not gonna see that in this movie
in this movie everything's gonna work
out great it's this is like by that I've
that feeling about law and order in fact
what am i I have no idea why anyone ever
watch that show and one of my secret
goals in life is at some point I would
like to be appointed executive producer
of Law & Order and I want to do ones
that completely subvert yes so we get
you through you're all everyone knows
exactly how every one of those shows is
always gonna turn out right and I want
to get to minute 47 and then just go on
some savage you turn that just appalls
at outrageous absolutely and then I'll
be done I'm quitting and I'm like yeah
fuck and don't tell anybody that Malcolm
Gladwell's taken over no yeah it'd be
totally honest I would push just gently
push Dick Wolf aside and say let me have
this one and we're gonna like completely
and we'll have it you know the the
villain that will actually be one of the
prosecutors that's what we'll do or
something right along those lines in
every episode ends like No Country for
Old Men style or this it's over you're
like what the fuck but there's something
there's a drug in those where they're
comforting and that people know that the
bad guys gonna get caught and the good
guy I don't know this is a random
thought but I don't know any men who
watch them and I've come to the belief
that they are there's something there
actually for women and there are a very
comforting kind of reassuring fantasy
about how the world works that that you
know there the system is so I had
cutting a mite this is an incredibly
complicated theory that I did
points about these kinds of things oh so
there's we all know what a Western is
yes a Western is where is conceptually a
world in which there is no law and order
and a man shows up and imposes
personally law and order on the
territory the community right so there
is also a eastern what is in Eastern and
Eastern is a place where by contrast is
a story where they're like I got this
straight it was four types the Eastern
is where there is law and order there is
so there are institutions of Justice but
they are have been subverted by people
from within so an Eastern would be the
Serpico is an Eastern it's a crooked cop
who is it's the bad apple who has you
know screwed up there there's lots of
tons and tons of of Hollywood movies are
Easterns the northern is the case where
law and order exists and law notre is
morally righteous system works law know
that show law and order is a northern
it's a functioning apparatus of Justice
which reliably and accurately produces
the right the correct result in
confronting criminality every single day
when it's on TV the southern is where
the the entirely the southern is all
John Grisham novels or Southern's they
are where the entire apparatus is
corrupt and where the reformer is not an
insider but an outsider so in in every
John Grisham novel the same they all
precede I love John Grisham to speak
Lear but they all perceive from the same
premise which is the system is rotten to
the core and only this white knight who
comes in from the outside can save us so
in the Western there is no system in the
northern there's a system it's fantastic
in in the eastern the system is reformed
from within but in the southern the
system has to be reformed from without
huh that's my complicated so I feel like
anything you can
place all art about law and order about
the criminal world criminal justice into
one of these four categories and the so
the Brits love the northern so what is
you know all of the the famous British
detective stories or always Robocop's
Sherlock Holmes yeah is it northern it's
like the system is like and the you know
that there's no corruption on the police
department they may be bumbling and
Charles gotta help them out but no-one's
you know off on some there's no there's
never a case where there's a rotten cop
who's selling out every is there a
modern version of the Western because
westerns all seem to take place between
the time of like fifteen sixteen hundred
and eighteen there is so leach how do
you read the Jack Reacher novels milu
child no but I watched one of the movies
those are letters does the westerns
there's you'll never the whole thing
about a Westers can you find the police
can you find the police officer you know
I you to find a police officer in a
leach odd novel they're not nowhere to
be found
Reacher is a retired the hero is a
retired Army investigator he's not even
in the army anymore and he's just
roaming around the country solving
crimes on his own and he'll confront
some massive criminal conspiracy and he
never calls the cops right that's the
whole premise that's so Western you
can't call the cops in the classic
Western because there's no cost as we
found right now you're in Montana on the
border but reach her it's a it's a 21st
century Western so he doesn't call a
cops cuz he doesn't feel like it it's
just like they never up here like and he
just murders everyone on his own and
then he gets on the train and goes to
the next place
they're amazing I love them so much do
you write fiction no never
I mean I I read so many thrillers I read
like I mean I'm probably read how many I
read here 50 60 70 really I read it you
know when you go in the airport that's a
lot into the Hudson news and you see all
those there's a whole like wall of those
trailers I have read every single winner
that means you're reading more than one
a week yeah easy
Wow and then I write on top of that I
read by serious stuff but I devour
people send me publishers send me these
things in the mail just because I don't
have to buy them anyway they just they
know that I'm obsessed like Lee childs
although he didn't with his most recent
Lee childs publisher for yours you'd
send me galleys I mean I didn't say
anyone not recently happen
I think they'd forgotten me fucked up
what are you consuming all of it reading
ORD is it any of it book on tape
no I'm reading you know yeah I mean I'm
reading the mean breakneck speed and I'm
but I do there's a guy I'd love I love
one of my favorites is Steven hunter who
writes - you know they made some movies
of his stuff Bob Lee swagger these
sniper movies they're fantastically well
written and those the minute he comes
out with a new one I I read it the
instant I mean I have to it's just like
there's just such delights I've never
heard oh he's so good really yeah so
good mmm anything with the word sniper
in it is generally one of his books oh
and the shooter with Mark Wahlberg was
one yeah and see that was a good but
they're the books are fantastic mmm I
would recommend him wholeheartedly um
how do you have the time to read all
these books well that's my job
not reading thrillers but but my job is
reading books literature yeah you know I
read very quickly I suppose but I I
don't watch a lot of TV I just watched a
little bit of sports I don't really
watch much so it's not a lot competing
for my attention but um you know I know
the book that I will read tonight it
dinner so when you set out to write a
book do you have a premise stewing in
your head where it's just like throbbing
where like that's it that's the one
or do you halfway in I get it I'll start
oh so you start a book with a little
kernel there'll be a story I'm
interested in I'll write it up and then
I'll see where can I go from there mmm
like they'll be every one of my books
began as a very very simple one chapter
but I didn't I didn't know what was
surrounded the chapter but there was
something
in the book in talking to strangers I
got interested in these spy stories he's
that story of a telephone Amon tez the
Cuban spy who rises to the top of the
American intelligence establishment I
began with that and I went and talked to
the guy who caught her and he had such a
fantastic interview with him and that
just got me incredibly excited and that
got me this whole thing about here's a
woman spying in plain sight for Castro
at the top of the American intelligence
establishment for 10 years no one
catches her even though she's not some
master spy she has the codes that she's
using in her purse and the radio she's
using in a shoe box in her closet
like we're not talking about James Bond
right I think she does it and no one
even comes close to her they all like
really really smart people and that was
such a fascinating notion that even in
the most sophisticated and by definition
paranoid agency in the American
government they're spies that get away
with all the stuff like do you think
anybody ever gets away with it to
retirement and then there's never
thought oh absolutely in fact really so
I go and I interview the guy who caught
this woman Ana Montes and I'm leaving to
go back to try back he's in a small town
in Wisconsin and I you know as one does
I turned off my tape recorder and put it
in my bag and I'm walking back to my car
he says I'll walk you to your car it's
like okay and we're walking down the
street and he begins to tell me another
story even better than the one I went
there to talk to him about which of
course my typical is no longer running
so I don't have the story anymore what
the fuck and the story was basically oh
there's another bigger spy out there I
now know I now realize there is there's
one out there right now well this was
three years ago there was one three
years ago that's out there was actually
just retired at the implication was
they're still there they're bigger and I
real it was one of those things where
when he put together all the pieces to
catch this one woman Anna Montez he
realized oh there's someone else and
then he retired Wow
he's like the implication was he
couldn't get anyone else interested in
finding the other bigger one but he knew
there was someone out there they didn't
know specifically who there were no he
knew
there was someone III forgot of course
because it was this tragic thing where I
turned up I can't find him back how
didn't you just hold on stop stop stop
let me put this back on do you think he
would have told you the story if your
tape recorder was running don't think so
oh fuck it's kind of great it's a great
he was incredibly that's where Siri
comes in hey Siri record this yeah
that's right he was it screw but I think
you know if you're in that world you
just assume yeah they all assume they're
spies like we have them we have them in
there so it's like they're not as maybe
they're not as worked up about it as we
are I don't know yeah there's there was
a story recently where Iran assassinated
some people that they suspected were CIA
spies and I always wondered like how
many people are spies and like you know
homeland style living in some other
country assimilating into their culture
getting jobs and organizations even even
in terrorist groups yeah
infiltrating what a crazy way to live
your life well there was a story I told
him one of my podcast episodes richest
history season two I think that I ran
across I loved reading these memoirs of
like mid-level retired intelligence
officers and there's tons of them and
people don't really read them and I love
their just because invariably like in
the middle of the book they'll tell you
some they'll just drop some crazy story
and this guy it was the former general
counsel the CIA wrote his memoirs really
interesting memoirs and the middlee
tells a story about how the CIA CIA a
guy who was a really big deal terrorists
in the 70s and 80s really big deal um
has a change of heart and comes to the
CIA and says I no longer believe in what
I'm doing I'd like to work for you and
proceeds to work for the CIA for some
period of time unknown period of time
and he's the he's way up high in Middle
Eastern terrorist organization and that
fact leaks to the New York Times and a
reporter for The New York Times basic
the price a story outing him and the CIA
French Lee tries to get in touch with
him to warn him and he vanishes they
think he was killed
fuck that reporter because there he was
a barely interested you if you're a
reporter and you have something like
that though that's what the episode is
all about okay because your whole job is
to release information your whole job is
to report on things so here you have
this bombshell of a story that'll make
you look like a hero but it could get
someone killed
what do you do fuck what I didn't
realize is that there's a established
pattern of people at this intelligence
services and editors of newspapers talk
all the time yeah about things like this
it's like so they have arrangements yeah
they ever put that in this case the
arrangement didn't work Malcolm you're
awesome let's wrap this up thank you
really appreciate I really appreciate
you work I've like I said have been a
gigantic fan for a long time so this is
a real treat for me and would you do
this again I would be delighted to thank
you thank you very much appreciate it
bye everybody
fuck
[Music]